Source: AWS Open Data - indian-high-court-judgments/data/pdf/year=1989/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010057461989_1_2012-05-18.pdf
Ref: data/pdf/year=1989/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010057461989_1_2012-05-18.pdf

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA 
 
Criminal Appeal (DB) No.102 of 1989 
 
(Against the judgment of conviction and order of 
sentence dated 9.02.1989 passed by Mr. Basudeo Sahai, 
learned 3 rd Additional Sessions Judge, Saharsa in 
Sessions Case No.48 of 1986) 
=========================================================== 
1. Umesh Yadav, son of Late Turanti Yadav, resident of Farsa ha, P.S.-Sour 
Bazar, District- Saharsa (since dead). 
2. Chandeshwari Yadav, son of late Kamleshwari Yadav (since dead). 
3. Bidyanand Yadav, son of late Kamleshwari Yadav. 
(Both residents of Sohath, P.S.- Sour Bazar, District- Saharsa. 
4. Bishwanath @ Bishun Dhobi, son of Gango Dhobi, resident of  village- 
Farsaha, P.S.- Sour Bazar, District- Saharsa. 
....   ....    Appellants 
Versus 
 
The State of Bihar 
  
....   ....  Respondent 
With 
 
Criminal Appeal (DB) No. 111 of  1989 
=========================================================== 
1. Dharam Lal Yadav, son of Mushilal Yadav. 
2. Karamlal Yadav, son of Mushilal Yadav 
3. Rabbo @ Rappo Yadav, son of Nunulal Yadav. 
4. Yogendra Dusadh, son of Madho Dusadh (since dead). 
5. Ram Prasad Amat, son of Jattu Rai (since dead). 
(All residents of village- Suhath, P.S.- Sour Bazar, District- Saharsa). 
....   ....    Appellants 
Versus 
 The State of Bihar 
....   ....  Respondent 
With 
 
Criminal Appeal (DB) No. 112 of  1989 
=========================================================== 
1. Satto Yadav, son of Hari Lal Yadav (since dead). 
2. Bido @ Bidyanand Yadav, son of Satto Yadav. 
(Both residents of village-Forsaha, P.O.- Sohad, P.S.- Sou r Bazar, District- 
Saharsa) 
....   ....    Appellants 
Versus 
 The State of Bihar 
....   ....  Respondent 
With 
 
Criminal Appeal (DB) No. 122 of  1989 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
2 
=========================================================== 
1. Satto Yadav, son of Lakhan Yadav (since dead). 
2. Ram Bahadur Yadav, son of Late Sukhdeo Yadav (since dead). 
3. Mahender Yadav, son of Late Ayodhi Prasad Yadav (since dead). 
4. Ram Bilas Yadav, son of Late Suti Yadav. 
5. Shiv Nath Yadav, son of Late Sakhi Yadav. 
6. Binod Yadav, son of Sri Mahendra Yadav. 
7. Jagdish Yadav, son of Late Bichkun Yadav. 
8. Rajendra Yadav, son of Late Soti Yadav. 
9. Saryug Mushar, son of Baunu Mushahar (since dead). 
10. Shibhan @ Shibu Yadav, son of Sri Nandi Yadav (since dead). 
11. Kishun Mushar, son of Raghubar Musahar(since dead). 
12. Mishri Mushar, son of Late Agarjit Mushahar. 
13. Gurkhan Mushahar, son of Sri Bijal Mushahar. 
14. Tina Mushar, son of Late Ram Adhin Mushahar. 
15. Jogendra Mushahar, son of Late Agarjit Mushahar. 
16. Jhingar Mushahar, son of Chhoti Mushahar. 
17. Rajdeo Yadav, son of Sri Nandi Yadav. 
18. Shobbal Yadav @ Shyamal Yadav, son of Sri Sukhdeo Yadav. 
19. Nageshwar Mushahar, son of Late Phulo Mushahar. 
20. Chandeshwar Mushahar, son of Sri Hakaroom Mushahar (since dead). 
21. Banarsi Mushahar, son of Chhoti Mushahar. 
22. Binchu Mushahar, son of Dorik Mushar (since dead). 
23. Jogi Yadav @ Jogendra Yadav, son of Sri Nandi Yadav. 
24. Barahmi Mushahar, son of Late Shobhi Mushahar. 
25. Ram Mushahar, son of Late Natu Mushahar. 
26. Sahib Mushahar, son of Late Agarjit Mushahar. 
27. Bouka Mushahar, son of Sri Kishan Mushahar 
28. Brahmi Yadav @ Brahmdeo Yadav, son of Late Bichkun Yadav. 
29. Saryug Yadav, son of Late Jhakush Yadav 
(All residents of village- Forsaha, P.O.- Sohwat, P.S.- Sou rt Bazar, District- 
Saharsa) 
....   ....    Appellants 
Versus 
The State of Bihar 
  
....   ....  Respondent 
=========================================================== 
Appearance: 
(In CR. APP (DB) No. 102 of 1989) 
For the Appellant/s   :   Mr. Rama Kant Sharma, Senior Advocate  
: Mr. Dharmendra Kumar Singh, Advocate 
For the Respondent/s  :         Ms. Shashi Bala Verma, A. P.P. 
    : Mr. Shiwesh Chandra Mishra, A.P.P.  
For the Informant : Mr. Vijay Shankar Shrivastava, Advo cate 
(In CR. APP (DB) No. 111 of 1989) 
For the Appellant/s    :          Mr. Krishna Prasad Singh , Senior Advocate 
    : Mr. Manindra Kishore Singh, Advocate 
    : Mr. Mithilesh Kumar Singh, Advocate 
For the Respondent/s   :         Ms. Shashi Bala Verma, A .P.P. 
    : Mr. Shiwesh Chandra Mishra, A.P.P.  
For the Informant : Mr. Vijay Shankar Shrivastava, Advo cate 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
3 
  
(In CR. APP (DB) No. 112 of 1989) 
For the Appellant/s    :  Mr. Mr. Chittaranjan Sinha, Senior  Advocate 
    : Mr. Subodh Kumar, Advocate 
 
For the Respondent/s  :         Ms. Shashi Bala Verma, A .P.P. 
    : Mr. Shiwesh Chandra Mishra, A.P.P.  
For the Informant : Mr. Vijay Shankar Shrivastava, Advo cate 
 (In CR. APP (DB) No. 122 of 1989) 
For the Appellant/s    :  Mr. Mr. Chittaranjan Sinha, Senior  Advocate 
    : Mr. Subodh Kumar, Advocate 
 
For the Respondent/s  :         Ms. Shashi Bala Verma, A. P.P. 
    : Mr. Shiwesh Chandra Mishra, A.P.P.  
For the Informant : Mr. Vijay Shankar Shrivastava, Advo cate 
.  
=========================================================== 
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE SHYAM KISHORE SHARMA 
And 
HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE AMARESH KUMAR LAL 
 
ORAL JUDGMENT 
(Per: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE AMARESH KUMAR LAL) 
Date: 18-05-2012 
 
 These appeals have been preferred against the judgment of 
conviction and order of sentence dated 9.02.1989 passed by the 
learned 3 rd Additional Sessions Judge, Saharsa in Sessions Case 
No.48 of 1986 by which the appellants Nageshwar Mushar, Saheb 
Mushar, Gurkun Mushar, Ram Mushar, Jogi Yadav @ Jogendra 
Yadav, Binod Yadav, Bishan @ Bishwanath Dhobi and Jagdish 
Yadav have been held guilty under Section 302 of the I.P.C. and have  
been sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for life. No separate 
sentence has been passed for their conviction under Section 302/149 
of the I.P.C. They have also been convicted under Sections 201, 380  
& 148 of the I.P.C. and have been sentenced to undergo rigorous 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
4 
imprisonment for two years each under Sections 201, 380 and 148 of 
the I.P.C. each and their sentences have been ordered to run 
concurrently. 
2. The accused Mishri  Mushar, Jogendra Mushar, Jhinger 
Mushar, Banarsi Mushar, Chandeshwari Mushar, Sukhi Musha r, 
Binchu Mushar, Saryug Mushar, Tina Mushar, Kishan Mushar,  
Brahai Mushar, Umesh Yadav, Shibu @ Shiban Yadav, Satto Yadav 
son of Lakhan Yadav, Rajdeo Yadav, Brahamdeo Yadav @ Brahai 
Yadav, Ram Bahadur Yadav, Ram Bilash Yadav, Shabbal Yadav @ 
Shyamal Yadav, Shivnath Yadav, Saryug Yadav, Satto Yadav son of 
Hari Lal Yadav, Bido Baiday Yadav son of Satto Yadav, Vidyanand 
Yadav son of Kamleshwari Yadav, Dharam Lal Yadav, Karamlal 
Yadav, Yogendra Dusadh, Rabbo Yadav, Rajendra Yadav have been 
convicted and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life under 
Sections 302/149 of the I.P.C. and further  rigorous imprisonment f or 
two years each under Sections 148, 380 and 201 of the I.P.C. each and  
all the sentences have been ordered to run concurrently. 
3. Further accused Sabal Yadav @ Shyamal Yadav has 
been convicted and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 
six years under Section 307 of the I.P.C. which has been ordere d to 
run concurrently with his other sentences. 
4. The accused Brahmi Yadav has also been convicted and 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
5 
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for six years under 
Section 307 of the I.P.C. which has been ordered to run concurr ently 
with his other sentences. 
5. The accused Bilash @ Ram Bilash Yadav has been 
further convicted under Section 436 of the I.P.C. and has been 
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for six years and his 
sentence has been ordered to run concurrently with his other sen tences 
in other sections of the I.P.C. Bidhichand died, as such, no sentence 
has been passed for the charge under Section 436 of the I.P.C . and 
other sections of the I.P.C. 
6. The accused Mahendra Yadav, Ram Prasad Amat and 
Chandeshwari Yadav have been convicted and sentenced to undergo 
rigorous imprisonment for life under Section 302/149 of the I.P. C. and 
further rigorous imprisonment for two years each under Section 148  
of the I.P.C. and also rigorous imprisonment for two years under 
Section 201 of the I.P.C. and their sentences have been orde red to run 
concurrently alongwith other sentences passed against them.  
7. Since all these appeals have arisen out of the aforesai d 
judgment of conviction and order of sentence, as such, all the se 
appeals have been heard together and are being disposed of by thi s 
common judgment. 
8. It appears from the record that it was reported that 14 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
6 
appellants died during the pendency of these appeals. As such, a 
report was called for from the Superintendent of Police, Sah arsa 
regarding the death of those appellants. The Superintendent of Poli ce 
has reported vide letter no.1491 dated 11.04.2012 that Umesh Yadav 
and Chandeshwari Yadav (appellant nos. 1 & 2 of Cr. Appeal No.102 
of 1989), Yogendra Dushadh and Ram Prasad Amat, son of Jattu R ai 
(appellants in Cr. Appeal No.111 of 1989), Satto Yadav son of Hari 
Lal Yadav (appellant no.1 in Cr. Appeal No.112 of 1989), Satto 
Yadav son of late Lakhan Yadav, Ram Bahadur Yadav, Mahendra 
Yadav, Saryug Mushhar, Shivan @ Shibu Yadav, Kishun Mushhar, 
Chandeshwar Mushhar and Binchhu Mushhar (all appellants in Cr. 
Appeal No.122 of 1989) died and a certificate gratned by the 
Sarpanch of Gram Suhath has also been attached. As such, t he appeals 
of the aforesaid appellants are abated against them. It has been 
reported that Teena Mushhar, son of late Ramadhin Mushar of 
village-Forsaha, P.S.-Saur Bazar, District- Saharsa came out from the 
jail 10-12 years ago, but he has not returned to his house and there is 
no other members in his house from which the information regar ding 
his death could be obtained. 
9. The prosecution case, in brief, is that Asho Devi 
(P.W.14) wife of Jaldhar Yadav (deceased) gave her fardbeyan 
(Ext.10) to S.I., S.J. Murmu (P.W.18) of Saurbazar police station , 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
7 
district- Saharsa on 23.06.1985 at 11.30 hours at the Gohal of Jaldh ar 
Yadav at Forsaha that in the early morning, she was brooming and 
sweeping inside her house. Her husband Jaldhar Yadav was sleeping 
in another room. In the meantime, 20-25 persons armed with ar rows, 
bows, lathies, Bhalas and guns entered  into her courtyard, all of a 
sudden and uttered that the members of the family of Jaldhar Yadav 
would be killed. After hearing this noise, her husband Jaldhar Yadav 
tried to flee away, but one Umesh Yadav shot fire upon him. She did  
not know as to whether it hit him or not some how or other Jald har 
succeeded in fleeing away while the members of the mob came inside  
her courtyard. She identified Nageshwar Mushhar, Mishri Mushh ar, 
Sahab Mushhar, Jhingra Mushhar, Banarsi Mushhar, Chandeshari 
Mushhar, Ram Mushhar, Bauka Mushhar, Gurkun Mushhar, Umesh 
Yadav, Shiv Yadav, Yogi Yadav, Rajdeo Yadav, Vinod Yadav, 
Mahendra Yadav, Jagdish Yadav, Ram Yadav, Chanchal Yadav, 
Vidhichand Yadav, Ram Bahadur Yadav, all these persons were 
armed with bows and arrows, lathies, Bhala only Umesh Yadav was 
armed with gun. After seeing that her husband was fleeing away, they 
shot arrows which hit her son Manoj Lal Yadav (P.W.7). She dra gged 
him in the kitchen garden. She has further stated that she als o saw 
about 100 persons armed with various weapons entered into the house 
of the five brothers of her husband. She identified Vilash Yadav, 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
8 
Sabal Yadav, Shatrughan  Yadav, who were riding on horse and were 
instigating others  that no one could be escaped and should be killed. 
She also identified Shiv Pd. Yadav, Rajendra Yadav, Shiv Nath 
Yadav, Jay Nath Yadav, Saryug Yadav, Satto Yadav, Dani Yadav, 
Ram Yadav, Yogendra Mushhar, Binchu Mushhar, Saryug Mushhar, 
Brahmi Mushhar, Vishwanath Dhobi, Sato Yadav, Bino Yadav, 
Yogendra Dushadh, Ram Prasad Amat, Yadu Yadav, Rabbo Yadav, 
Chandeshwari Yadav, Vidyanand Yadav, Dharam Lal Yadav, Karam 
Lal Yadav, Heena Mushhar, Birbal Mushhar, KIshun Mushhar and 
Bablu Yadav all were armed with various weapons. They were bows  
and arrows, which caused injuries to several persons. Horse rider 
Bilash Yadav lit fire in the thatched roof of Shibal Yadav. Bidhicha nd 
Yadav set fire in the house of Janardan Yadav. Shiv Prasad Yadav set  
fire which caused destruction of the house of the informant. I n this 
way, thatched house of all the brothers of her husband were b urning. 
The mob killed the members of her family and threw them in the  fire. 
They threw 5-6 persons in the fire. She could not name those pe rsons 
as the dead bodies were not fit to be identified. She has further stated  
that she also saw that when the houses were burning, some pe rsons 
dragged her husband in the fire. His body was burnt and it was not fit 
to be identified. She has further alleged that the members of the  mob 
looted the grains and other articles from the houses. They also looted 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
9 
their cattle. She also came to know  from her Gotani that her hus band 
Janardan Yadav was also killed and thrown in the flame. When she 
came to know that the police has come, thereafter, the informant came 
out. It has been alleged that due to previous old enmity and litigation 
between her husband and Shiv Prasad Yadav, the occurrence has 
taken place. On the fardbeyan of the informant Asho Devi, Saur Bazar  
P.S. Case No.64 dated 25.06.1985 was registered under Sections 147, 
148, 149, 323, 324, 307, 302, 436, 379 and 380 of the I.P.C. and 
Section 27 of the Arms Act. After investigation, charge-sheet was  
submitted. The case was committed to the court of sessions. The 
charges were framed against the accused including the appellan ts. 
Altogether 45 accused faced the trial. After the trial, 5 acc used were 
not found guilty and they have been acquitted by giving them the 
benefit of doubt and the appellants were convicted and sentenced in 
the manner indicated above. 
10. This Court is required to see as to whether the 
prosecution has been able to substantiate its case beyond all 
reasonable doubts against the appellants. 
11. The prosecution has examined the witnesses to prove 
its case. They are namely, P.W.1 Jai Narayan Yadav, P.W.2 Sabir 
Ahmad, P.W.3 Abhinandan Pd. Yadav, P.W.4 Jai Kishore Yadav, 
P.W.5 Sita Ram Yadav, P.W.6 Siwan Yadav, P.W.7 Manoj Kumar 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
10 
Yadav, P.W.8 Kapileshwar Pd. Yadav, P.W.9 Phool Kumari Devi, 
P.W.10 Neera Devi, P.W.11 Nageshwar Yadav, P.W.12 Sita Devi, 
P.W.13 Ramawater Paswan, P.W.14 Asho Devi, P.W.15 Ram Awatar 
Yadav, P.W.16 Dr. Brajindra Kumar Yadav, P.W.17 Arun Kumar 
Mandal, P.W.18 S.J.Murmu, P.W.19 Dilip Kumar Sinha, P.W.20 Dr. 
S.P. Singh and P.W.21 Chhotey Lal Yadav. 
12. P.W.2 is a constable and a formal witness. He has 
identified the writing and signature of the Officer-in-charge 
S.J.Murmu. The fardbeyan has been marked as Ext.1. P.W.10 and 
P.W.12 have been tendered. P.W.13 has been hostile. P.W.15 is al so a 
formal witness. P.W.21 is also a formal witness. He has taken the 
bloodstained soil to the Forensic Science Laboratory for chemical 
examination, which has been marked as Ext.5. He has also brought 
the forensic science laboratory report, which has been marked as  
Ext.19. 
13. P.W.1 has stated that on 23.06.1985 prior to the 
sunrise, he was giving fodder to his cattle at his Darwaja. He saw tha t 
about 150 persons armed with various weapons raising alarm came 
there. They were instigating each other to kill the members of  the 
family of Jaldhar Yadav. The members of the mob came to his h ouse 
and looted the grains and other articles. They also looted the h ouse of 
his brothers Jaldhar Yadav, Janardan Yadav, Shivan, Jay Kishore an d 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
11 
also the house of his brother-in-law Kapo. After looting the househ old 
articles, they set fire in their houses. They killed Jald har Yadav, 
Janardan Yadav, Ramdil Yadav, Bilo Yadav, Jagan Yadav, Umesh 
Yadav, Abhinandan Yadav and Arjun Yadav and threw them in the 
fire. He has stated that in the mob Umesh Yadav was armed with gun, 
Shiv Prasad Yadav was armed with Lathi, Rajendra Yadav was armed  
with gun, Bilash Yadav was armed with gun and riding on horse, 
Shamal Yadav was armed with bow and arrow and was riding on 
horse, Ramnath Yadav, Shivnath Yadav, Jainath Yadav, Mahendra 
Yadav, Binod Yadav, Pramod Yadav, Jagdish Yadav, Ramji Yadav 
Bidhichand Yadav, Brahmi @ Chanchal Yadav, Bishan Dhobi, Jang 
Bahadur Yadav, Dani Yadav, Satto Yadav, Saryug Yadav, Siwan 
Yadav, Yogi Yadav, Rajdeo Yadav, Nageshwar Mushhar, Saheb 
Mushhar, Mishri Mushhar, Banarsi Mushhar, Jhingur Mushhar, Te ena 
Mushhar, Ghurkun Mushhar, Chandeshwari Mushhar, Ram Mushhar, 
Bauku Mushhar, Kishun Mushhar, Binchu Mushhar, Saryug Mushhar, 
Brahmi Mushhar, Birbal Mushhar, Jadu Mushhar, Bablu Yadav, R abu 
Yadav, Ram Pd. Amat were armed with traditional weapons. He has 
further stated that accused Shiv Lal set fire in the house of Jaldhar 
Yadav, Bilash Yadav set fire in the house of Shiwan, Vidhichand set 
fire in the house of Janardan Yadav. His father Ramdeen Yadav wa s 
assaulted by Vishun Dhobi with spade. Jagdish Yadav assaulted his 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
12 
father with Farsa. Jagdish put hay on the dead body of his father and 
lit fire. He has further stated that his brother Janardan Yadav was 
giving fodder to the cattle. He was chased and surrounded by Shiv 
Nath Yadav, Binod Yadav, Pramod Yadav, Vilalsh Yadav, Shamal 
Yadav, Saryug Yadav, Satto Yadav, Ram Prasad Amat and Yadu 
Yadav. Binod Yadav and Yogi Yadav assaulted him with Farsa. Shiv 
Nath Yadav, Pramod Yadav, Ram Prasad Amat and Jadu Yadav 
dragged and threw Janardan in the fire. He has further stated that  
Jaldhar Yadav was chased by the accused. He was dragged and was  
thrown in the fire by them. He has further stated that Jay Nath Yada v 
assaulted him with arrow on his arm. Ramji Yadav assaulted with 
arrow on his back portion. He ran and climbed on bamboo tree and 
also saw the occurrence. In his cross-examination, he has state d that 
he did not know as to whether Shiv Prasad was killed on that date or  
not. He does not know as to whether Parasmani, Buchkun, Kunjan, 
Nemani and Mahendra Mushhar were killed in his village. He does 
not know as to whether his brother Jaldhar Yadav was an accus ed in 
the murder of Parasmani and others. This witness has also be en 
examined as P.W.1/A and has stated about the same fact as stated o n 
25.06.1987. In his cross-examination, he has stated that he did not see 
Shiv Prasad in the dead or injured condition in Saur Bazar Hospital. 
He has no information as to when Shiv Prasad was assaulted and 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
13 
when he did dye. He has admitted that Shiv Prasad was killed for 
which Saur Bazar P.S. Case No.63/1985 was lodged against the 
accused in which he, his father, brother and others are t he accused. He 
has further stated that he remained in the hospital for seven day s. His 
statement was recorded by the Officer-in-charge after seven days pr ior 
to that. He did not disclose the name of the accused to any one.  After 
seven days, his brother Manoj was released and he was sent to jail in 
the case of Shiv Prasad. He remained in the jail for four mont hs. In 
paragraph 33, he has stated that he fled away and hide himself, as 
such, his life could be saved. All the Mushhars are of his Tol a. He has 
also dispute with the Mushhars. He has also stated that he is an 
accused in Saur Bazar P.S. Case No.20/1984 regarding the loot of 
truck. He has further stated that Chhote Lal Yadav (P.W.21) is the 
step-brother of his father. Neero Devi is the daughter of Ramdil. Her 
husband is Kapo @ Kapileshwari Yadav. He has been cross-examined 
at length. From the mode of cross-examination, it appears tha t the 
defence wants to ask this witness that the occurrence of murder was 
held in 1977. Shiv Prasad has helped in that case and he was a w itness 
in that occurrence. Shiv Prasad was injured. Thereafter, his co-
villagers of Khajraha had taken revenge against P.W.1 and his 
relatives. 
14. P.W.3 has also supported the prosecution case like 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
14 
P.W.1. He has also named all the accused and narrated about the  
manner of occurrence. In paragraph 14, he has stated that he s aw 
altogether 8 dead bodies on the place of occurrence out of which  he 
identified the dead body of Jaldhar Yadav, Janardan Yadav, Jogen 
Yadav, Bilo Yadav and Ramdil Yadav. He has stated that 3 dead 
bodies were completely burnt and he could not identify them. He has  
further stated that out of fear, he has gone to village Jahra a nd when 
the matter was pacified, he returned after four days and his statement 
was taken by the police. In his cross-examination, he has state d that 
he has no information that the occurrence was taken place nor h e has 
any apprehension of such occurrence. The reason for the occurrence is 
the land dispute between Shiv Prasad and Jaldhar Yadav. In paragr aph 
27, he has stated that Jaldhar Yadav had been cultivating the land in 
Batai since a long time, but Shiv Prasad was claiming land on th e 
basis of some forged documents, but Jaldhar Yadav (deceased) d id not 
allow to take possession of the land. Shiv Prasad was also killed on 
the same day at the house of Saryug Mistri by Jaldhar. He di d not see 
the occurrence of assault to Shiv Prasad nor did he see the de ad body 
of Shiv Prasad. He has denied that at the time of occurrence , he was 
not in the village. 
15. P.W.4 Jai Kishore Yadav is also the brother of the 
deceased Jaldhar Yadav. He has also supported the prosecution case 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
15 
as P.W.1 and P.W.3. He has also given the details about the 
occurrence. In paragraph 2 and 3, he has stated that in the occur rence, 
he also received injuries caused by arrow in his neck and buttoc k. He 
is also an injured witness. He was admitted in the hospital a nd has 
stated that he remained in the hospital for seven days. Therea fter, the 
police took his statement. From perusal of the cross-examination, it  
appears that this witness does not take much time in giving the answer 
to his queries on behalf of the defence. However, from the cross-
examination, it does not appear that the defence has been able to 
demolish his evidence in examination-in-chief. 
16. P.W.5 Sita Ram Yadav is also an injured witness. He 
has stated that some members of the mob also came to his Da rwaja. 
He identified Brahmi Yadav, Pramod Yadav, Jagdish Yadav, 
Bidhichan Yadav, Ramji Yadav, Ram Bahadur Yadav and Teena 
Mushhar. Out of them, Brahmi and Pramod Yadav assaulted him by 
arrow, which caused him injuries. Teena Mushhar assaulted him wit h 
Lathi. He was taken to the Darwaja of Jaldhar where the police off icer 
came. The police officer saw his condition and he was sent to Sa ur 
Bazar Hospital and thereafter to Saharsa for treatment. His s tatement 
was recorded by the Magistrate. He has identified his signature 
(Ext.2) on the statement recorded by the Magistrate. In his cros s-
examination in paragraph 13, he has admitted that he is also an 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
16 
accused in the murder of Shiv Prasad. 
17. P.W.6 is the eldest brother of deceased Jaldhar. He has 
stated that he is eldest among his five brothers.  There are Jaldha r 
(deceased), Janardan (deceased), Jai Narayan (P.W.1) and Jai  Kishore 
(P.W.4). Out of five brothers, Jaldhar and Janardan were killed in  the 
occurrence. His father Ramdil was also killed in the same occu rrence. 
He has further stated that his father and five brothers were living 
separately. Sita Devi is his wife. Asho Devi is the wife of Jal dhar. 
Phul Kumari is the wife of Janardan. Neero Devi wife of Kapiles hwar 
@ Kappo Yadav is her sister. Kappo Yadav lives at Parsaha as 
Gharjamai. Abhinandan Yadav is the son of his sister Neero. Bilo 
Yadav is the son of Neero, who was also killed in the same 
occurrence. Manoj Yadav (P.W.7) is the son of his brother Ja ldhar 
Yadav. He, Jai Narayan, Jaldhar and Jai Kishore were living in the 
same courtyard. He was separate. The courtyard of Janardan is in the 
western side from the house of Jai Narayan. He has stated that the 
occurrence took place before rising of the sun. The mob was telling to  
kill the family members of Jaldhar Yadav. When he came out from his 
house, he saw 20-25 persons in the courtyard. Out of them, h e 
identified Umesh Yadav, Mahendra Yadav, Shivan Yadav, Jogi 
Yadav, Rajdeo Yadav, Jagdish Yadav, Bidhichand Yadav, Brahmi 
Yadav. Umesh Yadav was armed with gun. Shiv Prasad  Yadav, 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
17 
Rajendra Yadav, Shiv Nath Yadav, Jai Nath Yadav, Shyamal Yadav 
were riding on horse. At the time of occurrence, the wife of Jai 
Narayan was in her Naihar. The wife of Jai Kishore was also not th ere 
as no Gauna has taken place. Manoj, son of Jaldhar was in the  village. 
Hare Ram and Manoranjan were in their Nanihal. He has als o stated 
that save his life, he fled away towards south west and crossed the 
river. In his cross-examination, he has stated that in the murder c ase 
of Shiv Prasad, he was in custody for 3-4 months. In his cross-
examination also, he has stated that on the date of occurrence, t he 
members of the mob took the cattle from his house. 
18. P.W.7 is the son of deceased Jaldhar Yadav. He has 
stated that on the date and time of occurrence, he was studying. 100-
150 persons came from north-east corner and surrounded his house. 
They were searching Jaldhar Yadav and telling that the members o f 
the family would be killed. There was also noise to loot the househo ld 
articles and to set fire in the house. He identified Bidhichand Yadav, 
Jagdish Yadav, Yogi Yadav, Gurkun Mushhar, Saheb Mushhar, 
Nageshwar Mushhar (all armed with Farsa), Rajendra Yadav arme d 
with gun, Vilash Yadav armed with gun and riding on horse. Ram 
Bahadur Yadav armed with Farsa, Chanchal @ Brahmi Yadav arme d 
with bow and arrow, Mahendra Yadav armed with Farsa, Shiwan 
Yadav armed with Farsa, Umesh Yadav armed with gun, Ram 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
18 
Mushhar armed with Farsa, Banarsi Mushhar armed with Fars a, 
Chandeshwar Mushhar armed with Farsa, Mishri Mushhar armed w ith 
Farsa, Jay Nath Yadav armed with bow and arrow, Bablu Yadav 
armed with bow and arrow, Shyamal Yadav armed with gun, bow and 
arrow and riding on horse, Ramji Yadav armed with bow and arrow, 
Dani Yadav armed with bow and arrow, Satto Yadav son of Hari Lal 
Yadav armed with Farsa, Yogendra Dushadh armed with bow and 
arrow, Bishwanath Dhobi armed with spade, Ram Prasad Amat arm ed 
with Farsa, Jadu Yadav armed with Farsa, Rabo Yadav armed with 
bow and arrow, Vidyanand Yadav armed with bow and arrow, 
Pramod Yadav armed with bow and arrow, Shiv Nath Yadav armed 
with Farsa, Saryug Yadav armed with bow and arrow and Satto 
Yadav son of Lakhan Yadav armed with bow and arrow. At that time,  
his uncle Janardan Yadav was giving fodder to animal. Satto Yadav, 
son of Lakhan Yadav, Saryug Yadav, Shiv Nath Yadav, Pramod 
Yadav, Vidyanand Yadav, Jadu Yadav, Ram Prasasd Amat, Dani 
Yadav, Vinod Yadav, Jogi Yadav, Shyamal Yadav and Vilalsh Yadav 
chased Janardan Yadav. He has also stated that Shyamal Yadav shot 
arrow, which caused injuries to his uncle Kishore Yadav in his neck. 
Jai Nath Yadav and Ram Ji Yadav assaulted with arrow to Jai 
Narayan Yadav. Bishwanath Dhobi assaulted his grandfather Ramdil 
with spade and Jagdish Yadav assaulted with Farsa and set fire after  
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
19 
putting hay in his person. After seeing this occurrence, he went in his 
courtyard. Siwan Yadav and Umesh Yadav were in the courtyard. 
Umesh Yadav was armed with gun. Gurkun Mushhar, Ram Mushhar, 
Chandeshwari Mushhar, Banarsi Mushhar, Bauka Mushhar, Jhingur 
Mushhar, Saheb Mushhar, Nageshwar Mushhar and Bilash Yadav 
were riding on horse. His father Jaldhar fled away towards southern 
side after seeing the mob. Umesh Yadav shot fire at him. Thereafte r, 
he (Jaldhar) ran towards southern side. Shiv Prasad Yadav, R ajendra 
Yadav, Brahmi @ Chanchal Yadav, Jagdish Yadav, Satto Yadav son 
of Hari Lall Yadav, Ram Bahadur Yadav, Rabo Yadav, Jogendra 
Dusadh, Bablu Yadav and Shatrughan Yadav chased his father 
towards the house of Saryug Mishri. He saw Birbal Mushhar, B anarsi 
Mushhar, Vishwanath Dhobi, Binchu Mushhar, Ram Mushhar, Bau ka 
Mushhar, Kishan Mushhar, Gurkun Mushhar, Saryug Mushhar, 
Nageshwar Mushhar, Saheb Mushhar and Yogendra Mushhar taking 
out grains from the Kothi (earthen big pot). He has further s tated that 
Shiv Prasad Yadav has set fire in his house. Vilash Yadav set fire i n 
the house of his uncle Shiv Nandan Yadav. Bidhichand Yadav set fire  
in the house of his uncle Janardan. Shyamal Yadav set arrow blow,  
which caused injuries in his (P.W.7) thigh. He and his mother Asho 
Devi while coming out the courtyard saw that Vilash Yadav set fire  at 
Yogendra Yadav and Janardan Yadav. He and his mother hide 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
20 
themselves in the back side of the house of the Upendra Yadav a nd 
saw the occurrence. He has further stated that while Tanuki Devi, his 
grandmother and his cousin Bilo Yadav were escaping through the 
corner of the Mushhari. Ram Mushhar and Gurkun Mushhar caught 
them. Saheb Mushhar and Nageshwar Mushhar killed Bilo Yadav and 
took his dead body and threw in the flame in the house of Kapo 
Yadav. Bidhichand Yadav, Ramji Yadav, Saheb Mushhar, Nageshwar 
Mushhar, Jhingur Mushhar, Mahendra Yadav, Jai Nath Yadav and 
Shyamal Yadav were killed Umesh Yadav, Abhinandan Yadav and 
Arjun Yadav in the southern-western corner of the Mushhari Tol a. 
Binchu Mushhar, Ram Mushhar, Gurkun Mushhar, Siwan Yadav and 
Shyamal Yadav took the injured and threw them in the burning house 
of Kapo Yadav. He has also stated that Shiv Nath Yadav, Pramod 
Yadav, Ram Pd. Amat, Jadu Yadav, Chandeshwari Yadav, Karamlal 
Yadav and Dharam Lal Yadav brought Janardan Yadav and also 
threw him in the flame of the house of Kapo Yadav. His father  Jaldhar 
Yadav was dragged by Chanchal @ Brahmi Yadav, Jagdish Yadav, 
Ram Bahadur Yadav, Rajendra Yadav, Yogendra Dushadh from the 
side of the house of Saryug Mishra and threw him in the flame o f the 
house of Kapo Yadav. He has also stated that the members of t he mob 
committed murder, looted articles and set fire in his house. After the  
movement of the members of the mob, the police officer came t here. 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
21 
Thereafter, he and his mother came out from the bush of Bhang and 
saw the burnt house and the dead body of 8 persons. When he went to 
the police, the police found them injured with arrow and sent him to 
Saur Bazar Hospital. In the hospital, the arrow was taken out. He has 
identified on the accused. In his cross-examination, he has s tated that 
at the time of occurrence, he was the student of 10 th class. He has been 
cross-examined at great length, but we do not find any reason to 
disbelieve his evidence. 
 It appears that his evidence is quite natural and 
trustworthy although he is an interested witness. 
19. P.W.8 Kapileshwar Prasad Yadav is the son-in-law of 
the deceased Ramdil Yadav. He has stated that after the marriage,  he 
started living in his Sasural Parsaha. He has also land and house 
(Kamat) in village Sohath Bharna at a distance of 1.00 K.M. fro m 
Parsaha. After hearing the noise of firing, he came fatly to village  
Parsaha. When he came near the bamboo trees of Bahujan Man dal, he 
saw that there was a mob of 100-150 persons. The members of the  
mob were telling that Jaldhar Yadav and his family members have to 
be killed. The mob was armed with various weapons. He has 
identified Shatrughan Yadav, Jadu Yadav, Bablu Yadav, Ram Prasad 
Amat, Yogendra Prasad, Shiv Prasad Yadav, Vilash Yadav, Rajendra 
Yadav, Mahendra Yadav, Binod Yadav, Pramod Yadav, Shiv Nath 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
22 
Yadav, Jai Nath Yadav, Shyamal Yadav, Jagdish Yadav, Ramji 
Yadav, Brahmi @ Chanchal Yadav and Bidhchand Yadav and also 
identified Kishan Dhobi. Jaldhar Yadav and Janardan Yadav fled 
away from his courtyard. Jai Narayan Yadav was assaulted by J ai 
Nath Yadav and Ram Ji Yadav with arrow. Jai Kishore Yadav was 
assaulted by Shyamal Yadav with arrow, which caused injury in his 
neck. Ramdil Yadav was killed by Kishun Dhobi and Jagdish Yadav 
and set fire on his person putting hay. After seeing this occurrenc e, he 
took his son Abhinandan to his Kamat and again he came to village 
Parsaha. At that time, there were no members of the mob and he saw 
his father-in-law and son-in-law burnt dead. He saw 8 dead bodies . 
His son Bilo Yadav was also killed and thrown in the flame. The 
police officer came there and prepared the seizure list. The 
bloodstained soil was seized and seizure list was prepared which was 
witnessed by him and Ramautar Paswan. He has identified his 
signature (Ext.3) on the seizure list. Further, the bloodstained so il was 
seized from the eastern side of Gohali of Saryug Mishra by th e police 
officer. Seizure list was prepared.He has identified his signatur e 
(Ext.3/1). Further, soil was seized by the police officer from  the Kachi 
Sarak. He has also stated that bloodstained soil was also seized fro m 
the plot/field of Debu Sah near the dead body of Yogendra Yadav 
which has been witnessed by him and Ramautar. His signature has 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
23 
been marked as Ext.3 series. He has also stated that wheat and mai ze 
were recovered from the possession of Kishun Mishra and seizure  list 
was prepared. Rice and wheat was also recovered from the hou se of 
Mishri Mushhar, Yogendra Mushhar, Saheb Mushhar, Nageshwar 
Mushhar. The grain was also recovered from the house of S aryug 
Mushhar, Gurkun Mushhar, Bauku Mushhar, Ram Mushhar, Binchu 
Mushhar, Bishan Dhobi, Banarsi Mushhar. He has also state d that the 
burnt utensil, grain, clothes and bamboo were seized from the hou se 
of Jaldhar yadav, Jai Kishore Yadav, Ramdil Yadav, Sabin Yadav , Jai 
Narayan Yadav, Janardan Yadav and Debu Sah in presence of him 
and another witness Nageshwar Yadav. He has also stated that 
Nageshwar Yadav is also name of Lattar Yadav and Kapo Yadav is 
his alias name. He has also cross-examined at great length. T he 
defence has failed to demolish his evidence. 
20. P.W.9 is the widow of deceased Janardan Yadav. She 
has supported the prosecution case and has stated that the members  of 
the mob came to his house. At that time, her husband Janardan  was 
giving fodder to his cattle. The members of the mob came and rais ed 
alarm to kill Jaldhar and his members of the family and pu t them in 
the fire. The members of the mob looted her house and set fire.  Her 
husband was surrounded by the members of the mob. Yogi Yadav and 
Binod Yadav killed her husband Janardan Yadav. After seeing the 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
24 
occurrence, out of apprehension, she went to the village Sohat  to the 
house of Triphul Devi taking both of her children. When he came  to 
know that the police officer came, then she returned to her house  and 
saw the dead body of her husband, his elder brother, his father and 
others. She identified Umesh Yadav, Mahendra Yadav, Binod Yadav, 
Pramod Yadav, Shiv Prasad Yadav, Rajendra Yadav, Bilash Yadav, 
Shyamal Yadav, Shiv Nath Yadav, Jai Nath Yadav, Jagdish Yadav, 
Ramji Yadav, Brahmi Yadav @ Chanchal Yadav, Bidhichand Yadav, 
Dani Yadav, Ram Bahadur Yadav, Bishan Dhobi, Satto Yadav, Siwan 
Yadav, Yogi Yadav, Rajendra Yadav, Teena Mushhar, Banarsi 
Mushhar, Jhingur Mushhar, Nageshwar Mushhar, Brahmi Mushhar, 
Mishri Mushhar, Saheb Mushhar, Yogendra Mushhar, Biltu Mus hhar, 
Ram Mushhar, Chandeshwari Mushhar, Gurkun Mushhar, Bauku 
Mushhar and Kishan Mushhar, all were armed with various weapo ns. 
She has also been cross-examined at length. 
 It appears that her evidence is also natural and 
trustworthy. The defence has failed to demolish her evidence. 
21. P.W.11 has stated that he came from his village 
Farsaha after knowing about the occurrence. He found that the hou se 
of Jaldhar Yadav and others were burnt and there were 8 burnt dea d 
bodies. Soon thereafter, the police officer came there and r ecorded the 
Fardbeyan of Asho Devi (P.W.14), wife of Jaldhar Yadav. After 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
25 
recording of the fardbeyan, he and Narayan Yadav put their signat ure, 
which has been marked as Exts.4 and 4/1. The inquest repot was 
prepared in presence of P.W.11 and P.W.1 and both of them 
witnessed the inquest report. Their signatures have been marked as 
Exts.4/2 and 4/3. He has further stated that the police officer pre pared 
the inquest of all the 8 dead bodies i.e. (1) Ramdil Yadav, (2) 
Yogendra Yadav, (3) Jaldhar Yadav, (4) Janardan Yadav, (5) Bilo 
Yadav, (6) Umesh Yadav, which was identified later on. The 7 th was 
also the dead body of an unknown person, which was later on 
identified as of Abhinandan Yadav and the 8 th was also of an 
unknown person. Later on the 8th dead body was identified as of Arjun 
Yadav. He has stated that the inquest reports of all these 8 dead body 
were prepared in presence of him and Narayan Yadav (P.W.1). Du e to 
mistake, the signature of him and of Narayan Yadav could not be 
taken on the 8 th dead body (dead body of Arjun Yadav). He has 
further stated that on the next day, the police recovered and se ized 
looted articles of the occurrence from the house of some Mushh ars of 
the Mushhari Tola and the seizure list was prepared, which was 
witnessed by him (P.W.11) and Kapo Yadav @ Kapileshwar Yadav 
(P.W.8). The houses of Mishri Mushhar, Yogendra Mushhar, Sa heb 
Mushhar, Nagenshwar Mushhar, Saryug Mushhar, Gurkun Mushhar, 
Ram Mushhar, Bhutu Mushhar @ Binu Mushhar, Banarsi Mushhar 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
26 
and Vishwanath Dhobit were searched and the looted grains were 
recovered and the separate seizure lists (11 in number) were prepare d 
in presence of P.W.11 an P.W.8. On the third day, the police of ficer 
seized the burnt articles from the houses of Ramdil Yadav , Jaldhar 
Yadav, Siwan Yadav, Janardan Yadav, Jai Narayan Yadav, Jai Kumar 
Yadav, Kapo @ Kapileshwar Yadav and Dev Narayan Sahu, which 
was witnessed by P.W.11 and P.W.8. He has also stated that a kid wa s 
also burnt, but no seizure list was prepared. He has further stated th at 
he also went to Sakali Basa with the police officer and from the  
members of the family of Umesh Yadav, Arjun Yadav, Abhinandan 
Yadav and Yogendra Yadav he also came to know that these persons 
were killed and burnt. In paragraph 18, he has stated that his anot her 
name is Lattar Yadav. He has denied the suggestion of the p rosecution 
that he did not go to the place of the occurrence and he has depos ed 
lie, as Janardan Yadav (deceased) was his brother-in-law. In 
paragraph 26, he has stated that first of all, police officer cam e in his 
presence. Thereafter, Asho Devi came out from the bush and n arrated 
about the occurrence. 
 It appears that his evidence is also natural and the defence  
has not been able to demolish his evidence. 
 22. P.W.14 Asho Devi is the informant and one of the 
victims of the occurrence. She has stated that the occurrence  started at 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
27 
5.00 A.M. at that time, she was cleaning/ brooming in her house. Her  
husband Jaldhar Yadav (deceased) was sleeping in the eastern room, 
all of a sudden, 20-25 persons of the mob entered into her courtya rd. 
They were armed with various weapons. They were telling that th e 
members of the family of Jaldhar Yadav be killed. She identified 
Umesh Yadav armed with gun, Mahendra Yadav, Vinod Yadav, 
Siwan Yadav @ Shivan Yadav, Yogi Yadav, Rajendra Yadav, Jagdish 
Yadav, Ramji Yadav @ Samo Yadav, Bidhichand Yadav, Brahmi 
Yadav, Ram Bahadur Yadav, Banarsi Mushhar, Jhingur Mushhar, 
Mishri Mushhar, Saheb Mushhar, Nageshwar Mushhar, Ram 
Mushhar, Chandeshwari Mushhar, Gurkun Mushhar and Bauku 
Mushhar. After hearing the noise, her husband escaped. Umesh Ya dav 
shot fire and the members of the mob shot arrow at him. She did n ot 
see as to whether it hit her husband or not. Her husband escaped. The  
members of the mob entered into her house and looted the household  
articles. Her son Manoj Yadav (P.W.7) was reading on the Bai thka. 
He came to courtyard. Shyamal Yadav shot arrow at him which hit 
him. She drew Manoj Yadav and hide in the bush of Bhang in the 
western side of her house and witnessed the occurrence from t here. 
She saw that there were 100 persons in the mob. They surrounded t he 
house of her husband and his brothers. She identified Bilash Yadav , 
Shiv Prasad Yadav, Rajendra Yadav, Pramod Yadav, Shyamal Yadav, 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
28 
Shiv Nath Yadav, Jai Nath Yadav, Bishan Dhobi, Dani Yadav, Satto 
Yadav son of Lakhan Yadav, Saryug Yadav, Teena Mushhar, 
Yogendra Mushhar, Brahmi Mushhar, Saryug Mushhar, Binchu 
Mushhar, Kishan Mushhar and Shatrighan Yadav. She has further 
stated that she saw Bilash Yadav carrying gun was riding on a horse. 
He set fire in the house of Shivan. Bidhichand set fire in the ho use of 
Janardan. Shiv Prasad set fire in the eastern portion of her h ouse. The 
houses began to burn. She has further stated that when her husba nd 
was escaping, the members of the mob followed him and dragged him  
back and put him in the flame of the house. She has further s tated that 
they burnt Bilo Yadav, Birendra Yadav, Janardan Yadav, Yogendra 
Yadav, Arjun Yadav, Umesh Yadav, Abhinandan Yadav and Ramdil 
Yadav in the flame of the houses. She has further stated t hat her 
Devers Jai Narayan (P.W.1) and Jai Kishore (P.W.4) had got arrow 
bow injuries. She has also stated that there was old enmity with S hiv 
Prasad prior to the occurrence and there was also litigation which had 
caused the occurrence and the documents relating to the litigatio n and 
land were burnt in the occurrence. After killing, looting the househ old 
articles and destruction of the houses, the members of th e mob moved 
away. After about one and half hour of the occurrence, the police 
officer came there. After seeing the police officer, she came out from 
the bush. The injured Jai Narayan Yadav (P.W.1), Sita Ram Yadav 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
29 
(P.W.5) and Manoj Yadav (P.W.7) also came before the police of ficer 
and they were sent to the hospital with Hajari Chaukidar. The po lice 
officer recorded her statement in the Gohal and he read over a nd 
explained the contents of her statement and after getting it correct,  she 
put her thumb impression. At that time, Nageshwar Yadav (P.W.11) 
and Narayan Yadav (P.W.1) were present there. They also put t heir 
signature on her fardbeyan. She has claimed to identify all the accused 
and no dispute has been raised regarding their identification by  this 
witness. She had seen the burnt houses and the dead bodies,  who were 
killed and burnt in the occurrence.  In paragraph no.31, she has state d 
that there was criminal case lodged by Shiv Prasad in which three 
members of her family were accused. 
 It appears that she has been cross-examined at great 
length. We find that her evidence is natural and convincing. The  
learned trial court has also noted her demeanour and she has been 
found weeping while narrating about the occurrence. 
23. P.W.16 Dr. Brajendra Kumar Yadav was posted at 
Saur Bazar Hospital as I/c Medical Officer on 23.06.1985. On that 
date, he examined at 6.00 P.M. Sita Ram Mandal (P.W.5) and found 
the following injuries on his person : 
(1) One punctured wound on the right scapular 
region including arrow. 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
30 
(2) One punctured wound on the right limbu 
region including arrow. 
(3) One lacerated wound on the back of the left 
foot 1 c.m x ½ c.m.x 1 c.m. 
(4) One lacerated wound on the lateral side of the 
right foot 1” x ½  c.m. x ½  c.m. 
 The opinion regarding injury nos. 1 and 2 was resolved which 
was to be given on receipt of report from Saharsa Hospital and th e rest 
injuries were simple in nature. Injury Nos. 1 and 2 were caused by 
sharp and pointed weapon such as arrow which was stiking in the 
injuries. The rest injuries were caused by hard and blunt substanc e 
such as lathi and by fall also. Age of the injuries was within 24 ho urs. 
The injury report has been marked as Ext.6. 
 24. On 24.06.1985, he examined Manoj Kumar (P.W.7), son of 
Jaldhar Yadav at 8.00 A.M. in Saur Bazar Hospital and found one 
punctured wound on the medial side of t he left thigh ¾” x 1 C .M. x 
3”. 
 In the opinion of the doctor, the injury has been found in simple 
in nature caused by sharp and pointed weapon such as arrow. Age of 
injuries was within 24 hours. One arrow was removed from the abo ve 
injury and the arrow was sent to the Officer-in-charge of Saur  Bazar 
Police Station. The injury report has been marked as Ext.6/1. 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
31 
 25. On that very date, he has also examined Jai Narayan Yadav 
(P.W.1) at 8.10 A.M. and found the following injuries on his person : 
(1) One punctured wound on the medial side 
of the left arm 1” x 1 c.m. x 5”. 
(2) One punctured wound on the left buttock 
¾” x 1 c.m. x 4”. 
In the opinion of the doctor, both the injuries were simple in 
nature caused by sharp and pointed instrument such as an arrow. Age 
of injury was within 24 hours. Two arrows were removed from the 
above injuries which were sent to Saur Bazar Police Station. The 
injury report has been marked as Ext.6/2. 
26. He has further stated that all theses injured were 
examined on the requisitions of the police. He has also pro ved the 
O.D. slip, which has been marked as Ext.7. He has not been cross -
examined. 
27. P.W.17 Arun Kumar Mandal was posted as Civil 
Assistant Surgeon at Madhepura Sadar Hospital. He has stated th at on 
26.06.1985, he conducted post-mortem examination on the dead body 
of Ram Dil Yadav, son of Beni Yadav, resident of village-Farsa ha, a 
male Hindu aged about 78 years. Dr.M.M. Ansari, Deputy 
Superintendent of Madhepura Hospital was an observer to the post 
mortem examination. He has stated that the dead body was received 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
32 
on 24.06.1985, which was identified by Constable Bishwanath 
Murmu. He has further stated that the dead body was completel y 
burnt and charred up to the 4 th degree without any injury mark on the 
remaining portion of the body. The injury marks could not be located 
as the body was completely charred and burnt and in that 
circumstance, no definite opinion regarding the death was given. The 
post mortem examination report has been marked as Ext.8. 
28. On the same day, he also conducted the post mortem 
examination on the dead body of Jaldhar, son of Ram Dil Yadav o f 
village- Farsaha, male Hindu aged about 45 years. His dead body was 
also identified by the Constable Bishwanath Murmu. The dead body 
was also completely burnt and charred up to 4 th degree. No injury 
mark could be detected. In the circumstances, no opinion could be 
given about the nature and size of the injuries and also about the  cause 
of death. The post mortem report has been marked as Ext.8/1. 
29. On the same day, he conducted the post mortem 
examination on the dead body of Janardan Yadav, son of Ram D il 
Yadav of the same place. The dead body was identified by the same  
constable Bishwanath Murmu. The entire body was completely burnt  
and charred up to 4 th degree so no injury mark could be detected and 
so no definite opinion regarding nature, size and cause of deat h could 
be given. The post-mortem report has been marked as Ext.8/2. 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
33 
30. On the same day, he conducted the post-mortem on the 
dead body of Birendra Yadav, aged about 14 years, son of 
Kapileshwar Yadav of village- Jamta. The dead body was identified 
by the same constable. The whole body was burnt and charred up t o 
4th degree. The whole body was in pieces. The joint had become 
displaced. No injury could be located due to charring of the body. No 
definite opinion could be given regarding nature, size and cause of 
death. The post-mortem report has been marked as Ext.8/3. 
31. He has stated that he also conducted post-mortem 
examination on the two unidentified dead bodies which were 
completely burnt and charred up to 4 th degree. The left leg of one of 
the dead bodies detected from the left knee joint. No definite opinion 
regarding cause of death or size and nature of injuries could be given 
due to that. The post-mortem examination report has been marked a s 
Exts.8/4 and 8/5. 
32. On the same day, he conducted the post-mortem 
examination on the dead body of Yogendra Yadav, son of Bano 
Yadav of village-Rakhondra, P.S.- Sonbarsa. The dead body was 
completely burnt and charred up to 4 th degree and so no injury mark 
could be located and so no definite opinion regarding cause of death 
could be given. The post-mortem examination report has been marked 
as Ext.8/6. 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
34 
33. On the same day, he also conducted the post-mortem 
examination on the dead body of Umesh Yadav (wrongly mentioned 
as Muni Lal Yadav) son of Bala Yadav and found that the body was  
completely burnt and charred up to 4 th degree. No definite opinion 
regarding injury could be given due to charring of the dead body, 32 
years, male Hindu. The post mortem examination report has been 
marked as Ext.8/7. All these post-mortem examinations have been 
conducted under the observation of Dr. M.M. Ansari, Deputy 
Superintendent of Madhepura Hospital. 
34. In cross-examination, he has stated that the bones of the  
dead bodies were not burnt. He has also stated that if an injury was 
caused by sharp cutting weapon and of heavy type and if the injur y 
goes up to bone, the injury would remain visible. He has also stated 
that on 23.06.1985 at about 6.00 P.M., he examined Sita Ram Mandal. 
On that day, when he came to Hospital, he saw one Sita Ram Ma ndal 
dead there. The S.I. of police Muroni had asked something in writing 
from him and he had given his reply separately. Both have been 
marked as Exts. F and G respectively (with objection). Sita Ram  had 
one bleeding injury. Injury nos. 1 and 2 of Sita Ram Mandal would be  
caused on shot from behind. 
35. P.W.18 S.J.Murmu was Officer-in-charge of Saur 
Bazar police station on 23.06.1985. On the same day at 10.00 A.M. 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
35 
Chaukidar Pulikit Paswan came at the police station and informed that 
some occurrence had taken place in village-Farsaha. This informat ion 
was made in S.D. Entry bearing S.D. Entry No.317 dated 23.06.1985, 
which has been marked as Ext.9. After getting information, he went to 
village Farsaha with police party and reached there on 11.00 A.M. He 
recorded the statement /fardbeyan of Asho Devi, wife of Jaldhar 
Yadav at her Gohal in presence of witnesses Nageshwar Yadav 
(P.W.11) and Narayan Yadav (P.W.1). The fardbeyan has been 
marked as Ext.10. The injured Sita Ram Mandal (P.W.5), Jai Naray an 
Yadav (P.W.1) and Manoj Kumar Yadav (P.W.7) came before him. 
Seeing their injury, he could not take their statement. Seeing the 
injuries, the injury report was prepared and they were sent to Saur 
Bazar Hospital with Chaukidar Hazari Paswan. On the basis  of the 
fardbeyan of Asho Devi (P.W.14), the case was instituted. He hims elf 
took the investigation of the case and he got prepared the inquest  
report on the dead body of Ramdil Yadav, son of  Beni Lal Yadav by 
A.S.I. V.C. Choudhary, which was witnessed by Narayan Yadav 
(P.W.1) and Nageshwar Yadav (P.W.11). The inquest report has been 
marked as Ext.11. He has further stated that in presence of thes e 
witnesses i.e. P.W.1 and P.W.11, he prepared the inquest report on the 
dead body of Yogendra Prasad, Jaldhar Yadav, Janardan Yadav, Bilo  
Yadav @ Birendra, Umesh Yadav (wrongly mentioned as Muni Lal 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
36 
Yadav) and of two unknown persons, which have been marked as 
Exts.11/1 to 11/7. He has further stated that due to mistake, he could 
not take the signature of the witnesses on the inquest report 
(Ext.11/7). He sent for photographer to take photographs of the dead 
bodies and deputed Defadar and Choukidar to look after them. He 
visited the place of occurrence, which was the houses of Ramdi l 
yadav and his sons, which were built of thatched. He has narrated i n 
details about the houses burnt of several persons including the ho uses 
of deceased of the occurrence. He also found the sign of destruct ion of 
Kothi (soil built godown) for keeping the grains. He also found th e 
burnt articles of the houses. He has stated that there was bush and 
Bhang in the barren land between the house of Kapo Yadav and Jai 
Kishore Yadav. He has also stated that two dead bodies could not be 
identified as they were also burnt. In paragraph 34, he has stated that 
he also visited the other place of occurrence, which is at a distance of 
500 yards south west  from the first place of occurrence from the 
house of Janardan Yadav. The second place of occurrence is the 
cultivated field of Dev Nandan Sah @ Debu Sah of village Farsaha 
where there was huge quantity of blood. It was told by the local 
person that in that field Janardan Yadav was surrounded and was 
killed with Farsa. He has also found the footsteps of horses in the  
field. He has also stated that near the place of occurrence, ther e is 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
37 
barren land and as such, the place of occurrence was vis ible from 
distance. He also visited the 3 rd place of occurrence, which is 2 K.M. 
away in southern side from the first place of occurrence. It was told 
that Jaldhar Yadav was killed at the house of Saryug Mishri of 
village- Sohat Marna. There was a cattle shed adjacent to the r oom of 
Saryug Mishri where there was bloodstained. It found that the dead 
body was dragged from about 1.00 K.M. from the first place o f 
occurrence. Grass and other plants were also lacerated. He has 
prepared a sketch of the place of occurrence, which has been ma rked 
as Ext.12. On 23.06.1985, he seized the bloodstained soil in presence 
of witnesses from the room of Saryug Mishri, which has been  marked 
as Ext.13. He also on the same day, seized the bloodstained s oil from 
the cattle shed of Saryug Mishri, which is at a distance of 1 5 cubits, 
which has been marked as Ext.13/1. He has also seized the 
bloodstained soil around the place of occurrence in presence of 
witnesses, which has been marked as Exts.13/2 to 13/4. He has stated 
that on 23.06.1985 itself, he searched Ram Prasad Amat and 
Yogendra Dushadh in the village Sohat Bharna, but they were 
absconding. He also searched the accused Shatrudhan Yadav, Ya du 
Yadav and Bablu Yadav in village Sohan Bharna, but they were al so 
absconding. On 24.06.1985, the Superintendent of Police, Saharsa 
came to the place of occurrence at Farsaha at 9.30 A.M. and took the 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
38 
statement of the informant and witnesses and in his presence, Ta nuki 
Devi, wife of Ramdil Yadav (deceased) put her bangles on the dea d 
body of Ramdil Yadav and said that it was the dead body of Ramd il 
Yadav and said she became widow. The photographer came at the 
place of occurrence and snapped the photographs of the dead b odies 
and burnt houses. All the eight dead bodies were sent to Madhepura 
Hospital through constable Vishwanath Murmu, Shivji Singh and 
others. During investigation, he searched the house of the accu sed and 
seized looted grains from several accused persons and the seiz ure list 
was prepared, which has been marked as Exts.13/5 to 13/16. He has 
also seized the burnt grains and remaining part of the burnt house s 
and other household articles from the place of occurrence , which have 
been marked as Exts.13/17 to 13/25. He got the post-mortem report. 
He sent the seized articles to the Forensic Science Laborator y, Patna 
for examination and later on which has been marked as Ext.14. After 
the investigation, he submitted the charge-sheet. In paragraph 88, he 
has stated that he had got the photography of the burnt dead bodies by 
the photographer Suresh Prasad Verma, Studio Aaina, Thana Roa d, 
Saharsa. This Studio was removed during the ante land encroachmen t 
drive. The photographs of the dead bodies have been marked a s Exts. 
X to X/3 for identification. The photographs of the burnt houses and  
the cattle shed were also made by him which have been marked a s 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
39 
Exts.X/4 to X/6. In his cross-examination, he has admitted that 
negative of the photographs were not before him as the photogr apher 
did not give him. In paragraph 99, he has stated that he also examine d 
Chandradeo @ Chandi Thakur in the counter case and also examine d 
S.I. Dilip Kumar, who had prepared the inquest report on Shiv Prasad 
Yadav. The post-mortem report of Shiv Prasad Yadav was received 
by him on 30.06.1985. Jai Narain Yadav, son of Ramdil Yadav was 
arrested and he took his statement. In paragraph 110, he has stated 
that he did not take the statement of Saryug Mishtri or the membe rs of 
his family as there was no one present in the village. He ha s also 
cross-examined at great length. 
36. P.W.19 Dilip Kumar Sinha was posted as Sub-
Inspector, Saur Bazar Police Station on 23.06.1985. He went to the 
hospital and the doctor gave him O.D. slip, which has already been 
marked as Ext.6. He recorded the statement of the injured Jai Nara in 
Yadav (P.W.1) and Manoj Kumar Yadav (P.W.7) in the hospital. The 
broken arrow was produced by the Dr. S.P. Singh (P.W.20). He 
prepared a production list, which was witnessed by Bilop Kumar 
Gupta and Anandi Thakur. The production list has already been 
marked as Ext.15. The bloodstained half pant of Manoj Kumar was 
produced before him. The injured Jai Kishore Yadav produced a 
Lungi and pant, which were bloodstained and bearing some hole. The 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
40 
production list was prepared in presence of the witnesses Dhire ndra 
Kumar and Shambhu Gupta. Both these production lists were marked 
as Exts.16 and 16/1. The arrow, Lungi and pant have been marked as 
material Exts. 1, 2 & 3. In his cross-examination, he has state d that he 
has made station diary entry 321, which is in his writing and 
signature, which has been marked as Ext.A. On 23.06.1985 at 6.30 
P.M., staff of the hospital came to him, which has been entere d into 
the Station Diary Entry No.333. It is in his writing and signature, 
which has been marked as Ext. A/1. S.D. Entries 328, 329 and 322 are 
also in his signature, which have been marked as Exts.A/2, A/3 and 
A/4. He has also stated that on 23.06.1985, he got the message of t he 
doctor of the hospital on the O.D. Slip that the injured Shiv Prasad 
died. Thereafter, he prepared the inquest report, which is not a vailable 
in the case diary. The F.I.R. is in his writing and signatur e, which has 
been marked as Ext.17. In his further cross-examination, he has s tated 
that Saur Bazar P.S. Case No.63/1985 is in his pen and signature, 
which has been marked as Ext.D. 
37. P.W.20 Dr. S.P. Singh was posted at Saur Bazar State 
Dispensary as Medical Officer on 23.06.1985. On that day, he 
examined Jai Kishore Yadav (P.W.4) at 10.30 A.M. and found the 
following injuries in his body :- 
(1) One arrow had pierced the right side of the 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
41 
upper neck 1” below the angle of mandible. The pointed 
and was peeping through the mouth cavity near the lateral 
pharyngeal wall. 
(2) One piercing wound ½ “ x ½” x 1” 
oblique over the left glutical region. 
38. He has found that injury no.1 was grievous in nature 
and has been caused by arrow. Injury No.2 was simple and cause d by 
sharp and pointed weapon. The arrow was made over to the Officer-
In-charge in presence of S.P., Saharsa. The injury repor t has been 
marked as Ext.6/3. He has also stated that he had sent the O.D. Slip to  
the police station and this O.D. Slip has been prepared by him and  
marked as Ext.7/A. The Officer-in-charge prepared the product ion list 
for the arrow given to him in his presence and he had signed on it.  
The production list (Ext.15) after extracting the arrow of Jai Ki shore 
and giving some aid, he referred to him Sadar Hospital with the 
function of S.I. of Saur Bazar police station. He had prepared the 
information slip which has been marked as Ext.18. In his cross-
examination, he has stated that on 23.06.1985 was a Sunday duty. On 
Sunday, outdoor was not functioned, but emergency was functioned. 
On 23.06.1985, he was not in emergency duty, but the injured had 
come to his official residence and the injury was profusely ble eding 
and was serious. He has stated that she did not make treatmen t to any 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
42 
injured Shiv Pd. Yadav. He cannot say as to whether he died in 
hospital or on that date or not. Later of Officer-in-charge and re plied 
made by him (P.W.20) have been marked as Exts. C and D. The out 
door register entry is in the pen of Dr. B.K.Yadav, I/c Medical 
Officer, which has been marked as Ext.E. 
39. The defence has also examined three witnesses. They 
are namely (1) Satish Chandra Verma (D.W.1) (2) Lachhami Yadav 
(D.W.2) and (3) Ashok Kumar (D.W.3). 
40. D.W.1 is an advocate clerk, who has pressed the 
signature of Shiv Prasad Yadav as Ext. ‘I’  on a top paper. In his cross-
examination, he has stated that the paper was not typed in his 
presence. 
41. D.W.2 has stated that his house is in village Farsaha 
Tola- Bharana, which is at a distance of half K.M. from the Tola of 
Shiv Prasad Yadav. On 23.06.1985 at the time of rising sun, he was 
going to Farsaha through Jolaha Toli. He found near the bamboo  
climbs that the leg of Shiv Pd. Yadav was cut and blood was oozing 
out. Shiv Pd. Told him that Siya Ram and Jaldhar had come with  the 
mob and assaulted him and fled away. He has further stated th at Shiv 
Pd. Was taken to the hospital and his injury was bandaged by 
Gamachha. He also saw that mob of about 150 persons armed with 
various weapons were coming from Khajuraha. On the same day a t 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
43 
about 10.30 A.M., he saw that the mob was returning towards 
Khajuraha. Later on, he came to know that the house of Jaldh ar was 
burnt. He did not know who had burnt the house. He has further  stated 
that in the year 1977 Buchkun Yadav was killed in the house of Shiv 
Prasad Yadav by Siya Ram Yadav of village-Khajuraha. The hous e of 
Shiv Prasad and others were burnt. Siya Ram, Jaldhar and others  were 
accused in the case of murder of Buchkun Yadav. In the murde r case 
of Buchkun, Jaldhar was acquitted and Siya Ram and others were  
convicted. Shiv Pd. Yadav was assaulted by Siya Ram Yadav and 
others. In his cross-examination, he has stated that he has not received 
any summon from the court. Pramod has brought him for deposition. 
In paragraph 14, he has stated that he saw Shiv Prasad in injured 
condition. He did not see as to how many times, the mob moved. He 
did not see the police officer. Shiv Prasad did not tell him anything. 
He did not see Manoj, Jai Narain and others in injured condition.  
42. D.W.3 Ashok Kumar was the Steno in the office of the 
Civil Surgeon, Saharsa. He has proved the report and certificates 
issued by Dr. R.N.Jha and S.D. Singh, which have been marked E xt. 
O/1. In his cross-examination, he has stated that both the doctors are 
alive. Those exhibits do not bear his signature. 
43. It has been submitted on behalf of the appellants that 
the learned trial court has not considered the evidence of the 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
44 
prosecution witnesses properly. The evidence of P.W.1, P.W.3, 
P.W.4, P.W.5, P.W.7 and P.W.14 are contradictory to each other with 
regard to manner and place of occurrence and there has been gr ave 
miscarriage of justice in convicting the appellants. 
44. After hearing the learned counsel for both the parties 
and on perusal of the record, it appears that the occurrence has been 
committed by the members of mob consisting of 100-150 persons. 
The intention of the members of mob was to annihilate Jaldhar Yadav 
and the members of his family. There has been motive of m ind and 
object of the mob was the same. The witnesses are the co-villa gers 
and all are hailing from agricultural family and are villagers. W e 
cannot accept minute details as stated in their earlier statement and 
before the Court. The contradictions do not go to the root of t he case. 
Minor contradiction is bound to occur. The contradictions which  go to 
the root of the case have rightly been ignored by the learned tria l 
court. The P.Ws.1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9 & 14 have seen the occurren ce and 
they have supported the prosecution case. Out of the prosecution 
witnesses, P.Ws.1, 4, 5 and 7 are the victims of the occurren ce as they 
have received the injuries caused by the accused. P.W.9 an d P.W.14 
are also the sufferers of this occurrence as they have lost their husband 
in the occurrence. The evidence of these witnesses is quite natural and 
convincing as we have already observed while dealing with the 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
45 
evidence of prosecution witnesses. The ocular evidence has been 
supported by the medical evidence of P.W.16, P.W.17 and P.W.20. 
P.W.16 and P.W.20 have examined injured and found the injuries on 
the person of the injured caused by arrow. P.W.17 has held the post 
mortem examination upon the dead bodies, which have been found 
charred and burnt. The post-mortem examination reports have been 
marked as Exts. 8 to 8/7. The accused have killed eight persons (1) 
Ramdil Yadav (2) Jaldhar Yadav (3) Janardan Yadav (4) Birendra 
Yadav @ Bilo Yadav (5) Yogendra Yadav (6) Umesh Yadav (7) 
Arjun Yadav & (8) Abhinandan Yadav and their dead bodies have 
been burnt in order to screen the accused from legal punishment. T he 
minor contradictions or inconsistencies, which are immetrial did n ot 
discredit the prosecution evidence as they do not go to the route of  the 
case and such contradiction do not effect the merit of the case.  
45. It appears from the evidence of ocular witnesses that 
there was common object of the unlawful assembly was to annihilate 
the members of the family of Jaldhar Yadav. In furtheranc e of 
common intention, the members of the mob have caused the dea th of 
Ramdil Yadav and his sons Janardan Yadav, Jaldhar Yadav. They 
have also killed Birendra Yadav, Yogendra Yadav, Umesh Yadav 
(wrongly mentioned as Muni Lal Yadav), Arjun Yadav and 
Abhinandan Yadav in furtherance of the common object of the mob. 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
46 
The members of the unlawful assembly has also caused the loot of the 
household articles of the victims of the occurrence, bur nt their houses 
and also put the dead bodies in the flame of the burning houses to 
screen the evidence from legal punishment. 
46. In this connection, a reference may be made to a 
decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Cour t in case of Waman & Ors. 
Vs. State of Maharastra reported in (2011) 7 SCC 295. 
47. After considering the evidence on record, the learned 
trial court has rightly acquitted five accused persons and convicted the 
appellants. We do not find any ground to interfere with the impugned 
judgment. The impugned judgment of conviction and order of 
sentence is hereby confirmed. 
48. During the pendency of the appeals, the appellants (1) 
Umesh Yadav (2) Chandeshwari Yadav (3) Yogendra Dushadh (4) 
Ram Prasad Amat (5) Satto Yadav son of Hari Lal Yadav (6) S atto 
Yadav son of late Lakhan Yadav (7) Ram Bahadur Yadav (8) 
Mahendra Yadav (9) Saryug Mushhar (10) Shivan @ Shibu Yadav 
(11) Kishun Mushhar (12) Chandeshwar Mushhar and (13) Binchhu 
Mushhar have died. As such, the proceedings against them are abated. 
49. The bail bonds of remaining 27 appellants, namely, (1) 
Bidyanand Yadav (2) Bishwanath @ Bishun Dhobi (3) Dharam Lal 
Yadav (4) Karamlal Yadav (5) Rabbo @ Rappo Yadav (6) Bido @ 
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.102 of 1989 dt.18-05-2012 
 
47 
Bidyanand Yadav (7) Ram Bilas Yadav (8) Shiv Nath Yadav (9) 
Binod Yadav (10) Jagdish Yadav (11) Rajendra Yadav (12) Mishri 
Mushhar (13) Gurkhan Mushhar (14) Jogendra Mushahar (15) J hingar 
Mushahar (16) Rajdeo Yadav (17) Shobbal Yadav (18) Nageshwar 
Mushhar (19) Banarsi Mushhar (20) Tina Mushhar (21) Jogi Yadav @  
Jogendra Yadav (22) Brahmi Mushhar (23) Ram Mushhar (24) Sahib  
Mushhahr (25) Bouka Mushhar (26) Brahimi Yadav @ Brahmdeo 
Yadav and (27) Saryug Yadav are cancelled and they are directed to 
surrender before the trial court to serve out the remaining sen tences. 
50. In the result, all these appeals are dismissed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Patna High Court, Patna 
Dated the 18th of May, 
2012 
N.A.F.R./V.K. Pandey/- 
 
               (Shyam Kishore Sharma, J.) 
 
 
 
 
                    (Amaresh Kumar Lal, J.) 
 
 
