Source: AWS Open Data - indian-high-court-judgments/data/pdf/year=1977/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010005221977_1_2012-04-17.pdf
Ref: data/pdf/year=1977/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010005221977_1_2012-04-17.pdf

Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
1/37 
 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA 
 
First Appeal No.764 of 1977 
 
 
(Against the judgment and decree dated 30.07.1977 passed by Sri 
Raja Ram Singh, 1st Additional Sub Judge, Begusarai in Title Suit 
No.45 of 1967/72 of 1973). 
===================================================  
Bachhi Devi & Ors 
....   ....    Defendants-Appellants 
 
Versus 
 
Madho Singh & Ors 
....   ....  Plaintiffs-Respondents 
===================================================  
Appearance : 
 
For the Appellant/s   :       Mr. S.S. Dvivedi, Sr. Advocate 
     Mr. Binod Kumar Singh, Advocate with him 
Mr. Chinta Haran Singh, Advocate 
 Mr. Madan Pd.Singh-2, Advocate 
  
For the Respondent/s :      Mr. Chhotelal Narayan Singh, Advocate 
     Mr. Pramod Kumar, Advocate 
     Mr. Ravi Bhardwaj, Advocate 
 Mr. Surendra Kumar, Advocate 
 
===================================================  
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE MUNGESHWAR SAHOO 
 
CAV JUDGMENT
 
Date: 17-04-2012 
 
Mungeshwar 
Sahoo, J. 
The defendants have filed the present First Appeal against the 
judgment and decree dated 30.07.1977 passed by Sri Raja Ram Singh, the 
learned 1 st Additional Subordinate Judge, Begusarai in Title Suit No.45 of  
1967/72 of 1973 decreeing the plaintiff-respond ent’s suit to the extent of half 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
2/37 
 
share on part suit property.  
(2)      The original plaintiff-respondent, Banarsi Singh  with his 
two sons filed Title Partition Suit No.45 of 1967 alleging that  one Babu Horil 
Singh was the common ancestor of the parties.  He had th ree sons namely, 
Harakh Singh, Ritlal Singh and Rangoo Singh.  The line of R angoo Singh 
extinct.  The plaintiffs are the descedants of Harakh Si ngh whereas the 
defendants are the descendents of Ritlal Singh.  The plai ntiff has given full 
genealogy in the plaint according to which Horil Singh had three sons 
namely, Harakh Singh, Ritlal Singh and Rangoo Singh.  Harak h Singh had 
three sons namely Chaman Singh, Matuki Singh and Maula Singh.  The son 
of Chaman Singh namely Banarsi Singh is the original plaintiff no.1.  His two 
sons are plaintiff nos.2 and 3.  Ritlal Singh had three sons namely Gopi Singh, 
Kali Singh and Sia Prasad Singh.  Gopi Singh had two sons n amely Dwarika 
Singh and Chano Singh.  Dwarika Singh had two sons namely Raghubansh 
Singh and Yadubansh Singh who are defendant nos.4 and 5.  Raghubansh 
Singh had one son, Narayan Singh, defendant no.5 whereas the three sons of 
Yadubansh Singh are defendant nos.7 to 9.  The three sons of Chano Singh @ 
Chandrashekhar Prasad Singh are defendant nos.10 to 12 namely Chhote 
Singh, Bal Singh and Bhirgu Singh.  The sons of defendant n o.10 are 
defendant nos.13, 14 and 15 whereas sons of defendant no.11 are de fendant 
nos.16 and 17.  The only son of defendant no.12 is defendant no.18. 
(3)      The second son of Ritlal Singh, i.e., Kali Sin gh had two 
sons namely Udit Narayan Singh and Shankar Sharan Prasad Singh.  Udit 
Narayan Singh had three sons, Lallan Singh, Madan Singh, Ranj an Singh. 
Lallan Singh is defendant no.19 and his only son Birja Singh i s defendant 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
3/37 
 
no.22.  Madan Singh is defendant no.20 and his only son Kisho re Singh is 
defendant no.28.  The three sons of Shankar Sharan Prasa d Singh are 
defendant nos.23, 24 and 25 whereas Shankar Sharan Prasad Sing h himself is 
defendant no.1.  Sia Prasad Singh had two sons Pratap Sin gh who is 
defendant no.2 and his three sons are defendant nos.29, 30 and 31.  The only 
son of defendant no.29 is Narayan who is defendant no.32.  T he three sons of 
defendant no.30 namely Haldhar Singh are defendant nos.33, 34 and 35.  The 
second son of Sia Prasad Singh namely Gangotri Singh is def endant no.3 
whereas his two sons Nand Kumar Singh and Brij Kumar Singh are defendant 
nos.26 and 27.  The third son of Horil Singh namely Rangoo Sin gh had two 
sons Bhatu Singh and Bhoop Singh.  Bhatu Singh died leaving behind widow, 
Jhalo @ Kherahia Wali.  Bhoop Singh died issueless. 
(4)    According to the plaintiffs, the family of the par ties had large 
area of joint family properties in the nature of Raiyat i kaymi lands and 
Milkiyat interest and different taujis along with Baka st lands.  All the 
members of joint family were in joint possession of the same and Babu Ritlal 
Singh was the karta of the family.  Many properties were ac quired by the 
members of the joint family in the name of one or the ot her family members 
but mostly in the name of karta of the family, i.e., Babu Ritlal Singh out of the 
income and savings of the joint family properties.  Babu Rango o Singh died 
long ago in jointness with his brothers leaving behind two sons namely, Bhatu 
Singh and Bhoop singh.  Both of them died issueless.  Bhatu Singh left 
behind widow, Jhalo who remained joint.  Harakh Singh had thr ee sons 
namely, Chaman Singh, Matuki Singh and Maula Singh.  The original 
plaintiff, Banarsi Singh is the son of Chaman Singh.  T he other two sons of 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
4/37 
 
Harakh Singh died issueless in the state of jointness w ith Chaman Singh. 
Babu Chaman Singh separated himself from sons of Babu Ritlal Singh but the 
entire joint family properties remained in joint possession of the parties. 
Widow of Bhatu Singh namely, Masomat Jhalo was known as Kherahia Wali 
according to the name of her village.   
(5)      The further case of the plaintiffs is that f or the sake of 
convenience of cultivation without reference to shares, t he sharers were 
cultivating some portion of land under partition separatel y.  After vesting the 
lands which were in possession of parties became Raiyati kaymi lands. 
Although, Babu Chaman Singh, father of plaintiff had sepa rated, the 
management of the properties continued to be done by Gopi Sin gh and Babu 
Kali Singh, sons of Ritlal Singh on behalf of the entir e family of the parties. 
The entire land of village Gangaprasad which is substantial  area is subjected 
to annual submersion and erosion by the river Gangas but for  few years, it is 
being cultivated.  The further case of the plaintiff is that the defendants have 
also separated themselves and the plaintiffs feel diffic ulty in joint possession 
and cultivation of the lands.  Six bighas of land which were given to Masomat 
Jhalo for her maintenance has reverted back to the parti es after her death is 
also liable for partition.  The separate schedules have been given describing in 
details the properties with the plaint.  The plaintiff s have got half share in the 
suit property mentioned in detail in the schedules. 
(6)      The defendant nos.2,3,26,27,29,30 and 31 filed a joint 
separate contesting written statement.  Their case in short is that there is no 
unity of title and possession between the parties.  After t he death of Horil 
Singh, Harakh Singh, the eldest member of the family beca me the karta long 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
5/37 
 
long ago much before the cadastral survey, he completely  separated from his 
brothers, Ritlal singh and Rangoo Singh in mess, residence and properties and 
partitioned all the properties including the immovable properties by metes and 
bounds.  The other two brothers, Ritlal Singh and Rangoo Singh remained 
joint.  Bhatu Singh and Bhoop Singh predeceased their f ather, Rangoo Singh 
in the state of jointness.  Thereafter in 1900(1307 Fasli), R angoo Singh also 
died in the state of jointness with Ritlal Singh and his  sons.  The three 
brothers had only a very meager joint family property.  In  the partition, 
Harakh Singh got 1/3 rd share and came in possession thereof and the 
remaining 2/3rd share came in possession of Ritlal Singh and Rangoo Sin gh 
who continued in possession thereof.  After the separatio n of Harakh Singh, 
the two brothers Ritlal Singh and Rangoo Singh acquired ex tensive properties 
by dint of their hard labour, trade and even after death o f Ritlal Singh and 
Rangoo Singh, the sons of Ritlal Singh acquired extensi ve properties with 
which the branch of Harakh Singh had no concern.  The pla intiff who is 
grandson of Harakh Singh, knowing fully the above facts, has filed this 
mischievous false suit with dishonest motive to harass the defendants. 
(7)     Regarding the genealogy, it is stated that Rangoo Singh had 
one daughter namely, Mantorano Devi and predeceased sons and da ughters. 
A separate genealogy table has been given at the foot of the written statement. 
No properties were acquired when the three brothers were join t.  There was 
no saving in the family as the income was very scanty.  Aft er separation of 
Harakh Singh, gradually the properties have been acquired eith er by Ritlal 
Singh or Rangoo Singh or by sons of Ritlal Singh.  Harakh  Singh died in the 
year 1899(1306 Fasli) in the state of jointness with his sons and was separated 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
6/37 
 
from his two brothers.  Rangoo Singh died in jointness wit h Ritlal Singh in 
the year 1900.  His sons had predeceased him.  On the death of Rangoo Singh, 
his interest devolved on Ritlal Singh by rule of survivorshi p.  Jhalo was the 
daughter of Bhatu Singh and the name of widow of Bhatu was Khe rahia Wali 
@ Murchha Devi.  In the year 1932, when there was partition betwe en the 
descendents of Babu Ritlal Singh in Title Partition Suit  No.58 of 1929 in 
compromise, 5 bighas 19 katthas and 18 dhurs was given for mai ntenance to 
Masomat Murchha Devi.  Subsequently, Chaman and Matuki separate d from 
one another and Chaman Singh also died in the year 1934 and M atuki Singh 
died in the year 1941 in the state of separation from each other.  Matuki Singh 
died leaving behind two daughters namely, Masomat Sohaga and Mas omat 
Baso.  Baso was married with Rambadan Singh of village Bikr am.  Sohago 
has 4 sons namely, Ramashish Singh, Ramchandra Singh, Ram  Babu Singh 
and Phulena Singh.  Baso became widow without any issue.  On the death of 
Matuki, his heirs inherited his property and they are in peacefu l possession 
thereof. 
(8)      Since Harakh Singh himself had completely separated from 
Ritlal and Rangoo long long ago and, therefore, there was no joint family and 
as such, the question of Chaman Singh separating from sons  of Ritlal Singh 
does not arise.  The plaintiffs falsely alleged that Cha man Singh separated 
from sons of Ritlal Singh and the joint family property r emained joint.  There 
had been separation and partition long before cadastral  survey between 
Harakh Singh on the one hand and Ritlal Singh and Rangoo Sing h jointly on 
the other hand.  After this partition, there had been self -acquisition made by 
joint family of Ritlal and Rangoo.  In the cadastral surv ey, lands of Harakh 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
7/37 
 
Singh were separately recorded in the name of his sons, C haman Singh and 
Matuki Singh.  The ancestral properties as well as subsequen t acquisition 
were separately recorded in the name of Ritlal Singh an d widow of Rangoo 
Singh namely Budhano Kuer. 
(9)         After separation and partition, Harakh Sigh begun to take 
loans from various persons including Ritlal Singh and Rangoo S ingh.  After 
his death, even Chaman Singh and Matuki Singh also took loan from Ritlal 
Singh and sons of Ritlal Singh.  After vesting, the proper ties have been 
recorded in the name of the defendants and there was n o Bakast land owned 
and possessed by the plaintiffs at the time of vesting of  zamindari as by that 
time, the plaintiffs have sold all their lands.  After separation and partition, 
Harakh Singh became karta of his family and on his death, his s ons were 
looking after the affairs and management of their own joint family properties. 
Subsequently, they also separated from each other.  Gopi S ingh and Kali 
Singh, sons of Ritlal Singh were never the karta of jo int family nor they ever 
managed the property.  Gopi Singh has predeceased his father, Ritlal Singh. 
(10)        Regarding the lands of Gangaprasad village is concerned, 
it is stated that the plaintiff’s ancestor had very sma ll share in that Mauja.  
Chaman Singh and Matuki Singh had orally sold the said lands to the ancestor 
of the defendants and put them in possession over the sam e.  After the death 
of ancestors, the defendants are coming in peaceful cultiva tion of the same. 
There were more than 100 co-sharers in the said village and unless all of them 
are made parties, the partition suit is liable to be dis missed for non-joinder of 
necessary parties.  The further case is that the state ment of the plaintiff to the 
effect that the defendants are separate amongst thems elves is correct.  There 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
8/37 
 
was Title Partition Suit No.58 of 1929 which was filed by Cha ndrashekhar 
Prasad Singh, one of the sons of Gopi Singh.  By a co mpromise decree dated 
21.02.1932, partition was affected between the members of the joint family of 
branch of Ritlal Singh.  In the said compromise, 2 annas  8 pies share was 
allotted to the plaintiffs.  Dwarika Prasad Singh and his  sons got 2 annas 8 
pies.  Kali Singh, son of Ritlal Singh and his sons got 5  annas 4 pies.  Sia 
Prasad Singh, son of Ritlal Singh and his sons got 5 ann as 4 pies.  All these 
properties have been falsely and intentionally and dishon estly included 
describing the same as joint family property.  Subsequently, t here had already 
been further partition, Pratap Narayan Singh, son of Sia P rasad Singh in the 
one hand and Gangoti Prasad Singh and his sons on the other hand.  
 (11)        The further case of the defendants is that  after partition, 
Harakh Singh and his sons incurred loans for meeting their nece ssity and they 
could not repay the loans so they sold their properties fro m time to time to the 
ancestors of these defendants jointly after survey.  A time came when they 
were left with no property and were on the point of starva tion.  Therefore, out 
of sympathy, Ritlal Singh gave 8 bighas 18 katthas 15 dhurs of land of plot 
no.3061 part of plot no.3081, plot nos.5, 10, 11 and 23 to Chaman Singh and 
Matuki Singh, ancestor of the plaintiffs for their main tenance without any 
right of alienation.  On the extinct of line of Harakh S ingh, the property was 
to revert back to the branch of Ritlal Singh.  The plaint iffs are enjoying the 
said properties till today.  In the compromise, in Title Partition Suit No.58 of 
1929, the above fact has been mentioned.  After death of Khe rahia Wali, the 
properties given to her for maintenance reverted to the f amily of Ritlal Singh 
as on the same condition it was given in maintenance.  No land described in 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
9/37 
 
schedule is joint family property.  Plot no.42, 169, 262, 29/1286, 179  and 2 
bighas 11 katthas 5 dhurs in plot no.35 and schedule no.6, plot no.46 of 
schedule no.47, schedule no.8 except plot no.2 are the la nds belonging to the 
strangers.  One of the suit properties have already been sold long long ago by 
the different defendants and their ancestors also and th e purchasers are in 
possession thereof.  The sold properties are described in schedule 1 being plot 
no.4071, part of plot no.3204 of schedule 3, part of plot no.35, 1 bigha 1 
kattha 10 dhurs in schedule 6.  Plot no.23 belongs to the plaintif fs exclusively 
which he has settled with Kamali Singh and Ram Kripal Singh  in 1950-1952 
which has been given in schedule 4 of the plaint.  Lands of khata no.282 
mentioned in schedule 9 are possessed by these defendants along with more 
than 100 co-sharers and plaintiff had no interest.  The s uit has been filed with 
dishonest intention.  The ancestor of the plaintiff gradually sold their various 
lands orally to the ancestor of the defendants about 60 y ears ago in several 
installments and the defendants are in possession thereof.   The said oral sales 
involved very small amounts of consideration money alwa ys much below 
Rs.100.  In written statement, further very minute details h ave been given as 
to the recording of the names of the parties with respect  to each plot.  These 
facts are admitted facts and, therefore, not necessary  for full description.  The 
main defence has been stated above.   
(12)        The other defendants appeared and they adopted th e 
written statement filed by the above defendants.  It appears that subsequently 
by amendment, many other properties were added in separate s chedules and 
therefore, the concerning defendants filed their additional  written statement 
regarding the amendment claiming that in fact, the properti es are their 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
10/37 
 
properties which were allotted to them in partition.  
(13)       On the basis of the aforesaid pleadings, the learned court 
below framed the following issues: 
I.  Is the suit as framed maintainable? 
II. Have the plaintiffs any right or cause of action to sue? 
III. Is the suit barred by limitation? 
IV. Is the suit barred by law of estoppel, waiver and acquiescence?  
V. Is the suit under valued and court fee paid in sufficient? 
VI. Is the suit bad for the defect of the parties? 
VII. Did Harakh Singh separate and did his other two brother s Ritlal Singh 
and Rangoo Singh remain joint? 
VIII. Is the story oral purchase as set up by the defendants, correct? 
IX. Did Harakh Singh grandfather of Plaintiff No.1 completel y separated 
from the ancestors of the defendants? 
X. Are the plaintiffs entitled to get a decree for partition as prayed for? 
XI. To what other relief or reliefs, if any, are the plaintiffs entitled to? 
(14)          After trial, the learned court below came to the 
conclusion that since the defendants alleged that there ha d been partition 
between Harakh Singh in one hand and Ritlal Singh and Rangoo Singh on the 
other hand, the onus is on the defendant to prove this fac t but the defendants 
failed to prove the partition alleged by them.  The learned court below also 
came to the conclusion that the defendants failed to prove  oral sale.  The 
Partition Suit No.58 of 1929 will not affect the right and ti tle of the plaintiffs 
as the ancestors of the plaintiffs were not made party .  The defendants failed 
to prove the self-acquisition of the properties by Ritlal and his sons out of 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
11/37 
 
their own income.  The separate mess, residence, culti vation of land, dealings 
of properties by the parties is not conclusive proof of parti tion.  The 
defendants failed to prove the time of partition and year of partition.  The 
presumption of jointness between the brothers is stronge r and the allegation 
made by the defendants is that Harakh Singh separated long long ago prior to 
cadastral survey.  Therefore, the burden was on the defen dants to revert this 
presumption but failed to do so.  On these findings, the lea rned court below 
came to the conclusion that there is unity of title a nd possession between the 
parties and since Rangoo Singh died, his properties devolved on Harakh 
Singh and Ritlal Singh, the plaintiffs have got half s hare in the properties. 
However, the court below found that some of the properties mentioned in the 
schedule of the plaint are properties of the strangers  or the purchasers are in 
possession thereof and, therefore, excluded from partiti on and thus decreed 
the plaintiff’s suit in part for some properties.  
(15)      The learned senior counsel, Mr. S.S. Dvivedi appea ring on 
behalf of the appellants submitted that the original owner of  the ancestral 
properties was Horil Singh.  The plaintiff is the 4 th generation whereas some 
defendants are 5th generation and some are 6 th generation.  No doubt, there is 
presumption of jointness to the effect that every Hindu fa mily is joint in food, 
worship and estate till the proof of division but in the present case, the suit has 
been filed for partition by the plaintiff who himself wa s 4th generation from 
the original founder.  In such circumstances, the presu mption of jointness is 
nil in the present case.  Moreover, the plaintiff himself in  the plaint admitted 
the fact that his father separated in mess and cultivat ion for convenience. 
Therefore, the learned court below has wrongly on the b asis of presumption 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
12/37 
 
only decreed the plaintiff’s suit.  There are overwhelming evidences on record 
to show that prior to cadastral survey, Harakh Singh had sepa rated himself in 
all respects and, therefore, the properties were recorded  separately in the 
name of his sons in the cadastral survey record of right s in the year 1902. 
After more than 6 decades, the plaintiffs are now claiming that there had been 
no partition alleged by the defendants.  There are also inter se transactions. 
The plaintiffs themselves in the plaint admitted that t he defendants also 
separated and there are inter se transaction but then th e learned court below 
without considering the legal position and the settled propo sition of law laid 
down by the Apex Court as well as by this court held that ther e was no 
partition long long ago prior to cadastral survey and, there fore, there is unity 
and title and possession between the parties and decreed the suit.      
(16)     The learned counsel further submitted that admitt edly 
Harakh Singh was the eldest brother and therefore, during life time of Harakh 
Singh, Ritlal could not have been the karta of the fa mily but wrongly the 
plaintiff’s case has been relied upon  and it is held that properties have been 
acquired by the karta in his name.  The learned court below also wrongly not 
relied upon the partition decree passed in Title Partition Suit No.58 of 1929 
which was between the sons of Ritlal Singh.  When there was separation and 
partition between the sons of Ritlal, there cannot be th e case that the sons of 
Horil Singh were joint.  The learned court below did not c onsider the inter se 
transaction and the cumulative effect of separate res idence, separate 
cultivation, separate dealings, separate acquisition and i nter se transaction for 
more than 6 decades.  According to the learned counsel, th e learned court 
below has approached the case in wrong angle.  On these grounds, the learned 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
13/37 
 
counsel submitted that the impugned judgment and decrees are liable to be set 
aside and the plaintiff’s suit for partition is liable to be dismissed with cost.  
(17)      On the contrary, the learned counsel, Mr. Chh otelal 
Narayan Singh appearing on behalf of the respondents submitte d that there is 
no illegality in the impugned judgment and decree.  According to the learned 
counsel, the Hindu family is presumed to be in joint.  The defendants alleged 
that there had been partition between the parties, i.e., Harakh Singh separated 
prior to cadastral survey, the other two brothers Ritlal an d Rangoo remained 
joint.  So far this case is concerned, it is for the def endant to prove that 
Harakh Singh separated.  The only case of the plaintiff i s that Harakh Singh 
also remained joint with the two brothers.  In such circum stances, the learned 
court below has rightly decreed the plaintiff- respondent’s suit for partition.  
Since Ritlal Singh was educated person and clever man, h e was managing the 
property and was the karta.  No doubt, the plaintiffs have s tated that Chaman 
Singh was separated from the sons of Ritlal Singh but the said separation was 
for the convenience.  In spite of the said separation, the property was being 
managed by the sons of Ritlal Singh namely, Kali Singh who wa s karta. 
Since there was large extent of property and all the propert ies acquired in the 
name of karta, Ritlal Singh out of the income of join t family property will be 
presumed to be the joint family property and the onus will be on the 
defendants to prove that they acquired the property without t he aid of joint 
family fund.  The Title Partition Suit No.58 of 1929 was filed by one of the 
sons of Ritlal Singh and in that case, the branch of Har akh Singh was not 
made party and moreover, there was no final decree in the  said suit.  In such 
circumstances, the learned court below has rightly held th at it will not affect 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
14/37 
 
the right of the plaintiffs.  The plaintiffs have got no property whereas the 
defendants are in possession of large extent of property w hich shows their 
dishonest intention.  In the evidence, it has been admi tted that Ritlal and his 
sons were going to the survey authorities during cadastral survey  and, 
therefore, they managed and got their names mutated as Ritlal Singh was very 
clever man and was only educated whereas the plaintiffs were  simple 
villagers, uneducated and were tending the cattle.  All the prope rties have 
been acquired either in the name of Ritlal Singh or his sons when he was karta 
of the joint family, therefore, it is joint family proper ty.  The separate 
residence, mess and dealing of the properties are not the pr oof of partition. 
The defendants have not given either the month or the ye ar and the manner of 
partition.  No details have been given by the defendants a s to which property 
was given in the share of Harakh Singh in the alleged partiti on.  To prove the 
oral sell by the ancestor of the plaintiffs, no direct evidence has been adduced 
by the defendants.  So far separate dealing of the property is concerned, 
according to the learned counsel, since the plaintiffs or their ancestors were in 
starving point, therefore, they were compelled to sell some of the properties 
but that do not mean that there had been partition between  the sons of Horil 
Singh as alleged by the defendants.   
(18)    The learned counsel relied upon AIR 1962 SC 
287(Bhagwan Dayal vs. Mostt. Rewati Devi)  and submitted that the general 
principle is that every Hindu family is presumed to be joi nt unless contrary is 
proved but this presumption can be rebutted by direct evidence  or by course 
of conduct.  There is no presumption that when one member separates from 
others, the later remained united.  Whether the later re mained united or not 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
15/37 
 
must be decided on the facts of each case.  In the present case, considering the 
facts, the learned court below found that there had been no separation of 
Harakh Singh from his two brothers.  The learned court bel ow has dealt with 
all the oral as well as documentary evidences and, there fore, in First Appeal, 
the findings recorded by the court below cannot be interfered with.   
(19)      It may be mentioned here that the parties hav e filed their 
written arguments giving in great details, the pleadings, th e evidences and the 
points submitted before this court.  Paper book has also been  filed.  During 
the course of arguments, both the learned counsels place d in extenso all the 
evidences documentary as well as oral to their best ability . Considering their 
hard labour and great assistance given to this court to the  expectation and 
satisfaction, if they are not praised, the judgment will be incomplete.   
(20)    However, considering the above rival contentions of  the 
parties, the only point arises for consideration in this  appeal is as to “whether 
there is unity of title and possession between the parti es and the plaintiffs are 
entitled for partition of their half share as claimed an d decreed by the court 
below?” 
(21)     The plaintiffs claimed for partition to the exte nt of half 
share alleging that Horil Singh had three sons namely, Har akh Singh, Ritlal 
Singh and Rangoo Singh.  The plaintiffs represent the branch of Harakh Singh 
whereas the defendants represent the branch of Ritlal S ingh.  The branch of 
Rangoo Singh extinct.  There had been no partition betwee n the parties.  On 
the other hand, according to the defendants, there had al ready been partition 
prior to cadastral survey and Harakh Singh separated from hi s two brothers. 
Accordingly, in the cadastral survey record of right, th e properties allotted in 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
16/37 
 
his share were recorded in the name of his sons whereas the properties 
allotted to his two brothers were recorded in the name of Ritlal or his sons.  In 
support of their respective cases, the parties have adduced evi dences oral as 
well as documentary.  In paragraph 8 of the plaint, the pl aintiffs specifically 
mentioned that after the death of Matuki and Maula, the plaintiff’s father 
namely, Chaman Singh separated from the sons of Babu Rit lal Singh.  At 
paragraph 10, it is mentioned that for the sake of convenie nce of cultivation 
without any reference to the shares, the sharers culti vated some portion of the 
lands under partition separately.  Therefore, the separate cultivation during the 
lifetime of father of plaintiffs is admitted by the plain tiffs themselves.  At 
paragraph 12, it has been stated that although, Chaman Sing h had separated 
but the management of the properties continued to be done by Babu Gopi 
Singh and Babu Kali Singh, sons of Ritlal Singh.  At paragraph 14, it has been 
stated that the defendants have also separated among the mselves.  In such 
circumstances, according to the plaintiffs themselves, the parties were 
separate since the lifetime of Chaman Singh.  Even the  defendants also 
separated and the parties were cultivating the lands separa tely.  The only case 
of the plaintiffs is that this cultivation was according to the convenience.  In 
such view of the matter, there was severance of coparcenar y status but at 
paragraph 4 of the plaint, it has been mentioned that R itlal Singh was the 
karta of the family and likewise, at paragraph 12, it is stat ed that after even 
separation of Chaman Singh, plaintiff’s father, the branch of Ritlal Singh, i.e., 
Gopi Singh and Kali Singh were managing the property being the  karta.  This 
case of the plaintiffs appears to be inconsistent with  each other.  When there 
had been severance of the joint family status during lifeti me of Chaman and 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
17/37 
 
he was cultivating some lands separately, may be it fo r the sake of 
convenience but in such circumstances, how the property was b eing managed 
by the branch of Ritlal Singh.  
(22)     In the case of Kalyani vs. Narayanan and Ors., 1980(2) 
Supreme Court reports 1130,  the Apex Court at paragraph 3 has held as 
follows: 
“3. Partition is a word of technical import in 
Hindu law.  Partition in one sense is a severance 
of joint family status and coparcener of a 
coparcenary is entitled to claim it as a matter of 
his individual volition.  In this narrow sense all 
that is necessary to constitute partition is a 
definite and unequivocal indication of his 
intention by a member of a joint family to 
separate himself from the family and enjoy his 
share in severalty.  Such an unequivocal 
intention to separate brings about a disruption 
of joint family status, at any rate, in respect of 
separating member or members and thereby 
puts an end to the coparcenary with right of 
survivorship and such separated member holds 
from the time common.  Such partition has an 
impact on devolution of shares of such 
members.  It goes to his heirs displacing 
survivorship.  Such partition irrespective of 
whether it is accompanied or followed by 
division of properties by metes and bounds 
covers both a division of right and division of 
property.  A disruption of joint family status by 
definite and unequivocal indication to separate 
implies separation in interest and in right, 
although not immediately followed by a de facto 
actual division of the subject-matter.  This may 
at any time, be claimed by virtue of the separate 
right.  A physical and actual division of 
property by metes and bounds follows from 
disruption of status and would be termed 
partition in a broader sense.”  
 (23)       In view of the above settled proposition of l aw laid down 
by the Apex Court, such separation puts an end to the copar cenary with right 
of survivorship.  When status of coparcenary family seized or put to an end, 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
18/37 
 
how can there be a karta of one branch to the family of another branch. 
(24)       It is well settled principles of law that genera lly speaking 
the normal state of every Hindu family is presumed to be j oint in the absence 
of proof of division.  This presumption is stronger in the  case of brothers than 
in the case of cousins as the farther you go from the founder of the family, the 
presumption becomes weaker and weaker.  The reason is that  brothers are for 
the most part remained undivided, second, cousins are generally separated and 
third, cousins are for the most part separated.  In this pr esent case, the 
admitted position is that Horil Singh was the common anc estor of the parties. 
The plaintiffs are 4 th generation whereas some defendants are 5 th generation 
and some are 6 th generation.  Therefore, here the presumption which was in 
favour of the plaintiff is nil.  
(25)      The learned counsel for the respondents submitt ed that it is 
the case of the defendants that Horil Singh had separat ed and, therefore, the 
separation is pleaded between the brothers.  In such cir cumstances, the 
presumption is stronger in this case.  So far this submissi on is concerned, we 
are not considering here the suit filed by either Horil Si ngh or Ritlal Singh. 
As alleged by the defendant, the partition had taken place l ong ago prior to 
cadastral survey.  Cadastral survey concluded in the year 1902.  Harakh Singh 
died in the year 1899.  The suit has been instituted in the ye ar 1967 and the 
plaintiff is claiming that there had been no partition pri or to 1899.  In view of 
the above fact, only on the presumption, it cannot be held that there is unity of 
title and possession.  As stated above, we are consider ing the partition 
between the parties who are either the 4 th generation or the 5 th or 6 th 
generation. 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
19/37 
 
(26)   Now let us consider the evidences of the parties.  P.W. 3 is 
Banarsi Singh, the original plaintiff no.1.  In his evidenc e, he has admitted 
that there had been partition amongst the descendents of Ritlal Singh.  He has 
also admitted that there had been separate alienation by t he parties and at 
paragraph 23, he has admitted that about 9 bighas land was give n to him in 
Dan, i.e., gifted to him by Ritlal.  It may be mentioned h ere that this is the 
case of the defendants that there was no land with the branch of Harakh Singh 
and, therefore, for their maintenance, Ritlal had give n about 9 bighas of land. 
The question arises is if the parties were joint then h ow one branch, i.e., one 
member of the joint family will give the joint family proper ty in gift to the 
other member of the joint family.  In my opinion, this will  amount to inter se 
transaction.  P.W. 2 has stated that all the 3 sons of Horil Singh were joint and 
that the branch of Rangoo Singh extinct and that no pa rtition had taken place 
between the 3 brothers.  The properties of the 3 brothers remained joint.  They 
were in possession of huge ancestral properties which gradually  increased. 
Ritlal Singh was the karta and after him, Kali Singh became t he karta of the 
family and thereafter, Dwarika Singh was the karta and at present, Pratap 
Narayan Singh is the karta of the family.  As stated abov e, P.W. 3 is the 
original plaintiff himself.  These are the material witn esses on the point of 
partition between the parties.   
(27)     Now let us examine the documentary evidences produced 
by the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs have produced Exhibit 2/j, 2/n, 2/p, 2/s and 2/t. 
Exhibit 2/j is equal to Exhibit DD produced by the defendants.  Ex hibit 2/n is 
continuous khatiyan of tauji no.830, khata no.74 and 75 wherein share of 
Matuki Singh and Chaman Singh have been shown to be 47 decimal s and 30 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
20/37 
 
decimals as Bakast Malik and share of Ritlal is shown 4 a cres 1 decimal as 
Bakast Malik.  The learned counsel for the plaintiffs-r espondents submitted 
that because Ritlal was karta and he was attending the surve y authorities 
during survey, he got his name entered regarding the maximum ar ea.  Exhibit 
2/p is khewat of Mauja Gangaprasad.  In khewat entry no.1/5 in t auji 
no.830/6, the shares of Ritlal Singh and Masomat Budhnu Kumari  is jointly 
recorded and in tauji no.830 share of Chaman Singh and Mat uki Singh is 
jointly recorded having equal share.  The learned counsel submit ted that from 
perusal of all the entry barring meager share almost al l shares are recorded in 
the name of Ritlal Singh and Budhnu Kumari.  On the stren gth of this 
document, the learned counsel submitted that had there been partition, the 
property would have been recorded in equal share in the name of 3 brothers.  
(28)     The learned counsel placed Exhibit 2/s which is khe wat of 
Mauja Miachak with respect to tauji no.1412.  On the strength of this 
document, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted t hat the share of 
Ritlal Singh and share of Chaman Singh and Matuki Singh ar e recorded as 
half and half.  Therefore, the claim of the defendant th at Chaman Singh and 
Rangoo Singh got 2/3 rd share is wrong.  Exhibit 2/t shows that share of Ritlal 
Singh is separately recorded and the share of Chaman Sin gh and Matuki 
Singh is separately recorded and likewise, the share of R angoo Singh was 
recorded in the name of Masomat Budhnu.  Exhibit 2/I is conti nuous khatiyan 
of Mauja Malpur in tauji no.830.  Only 96 decimals of land is re corded in the 
name of Chaman Singh in khata no.6 and land measuring 2 ac res 33 decimals 
is recorded in khata no.40 in the name of Ritlal Singh.  The plaintiffs have 
also produced Exhibit 2/k, 2/n, 2/o which are continuous khatiyans of 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
21/37 
 
different Maujas.  Exhibit 2/u is khewat of Mauja Sikandarpur.   Exhibit 2/h is 
khewat of Mauja Gangaprasad.  Exhibit 2/q is of Mauja Gangaprasa d in tauji 
no.830/9.  All other documents i.e. Exhibit 2 series are eith er continuous 
khatiyans or the khewats.  All these documents are of the  year ranging from 
the year 1895-96 to 1907-08.  
(29)       Exhibit-3 is register prepared under Section 6 and 7 of 
Bengal Council Act, 1896.  Exhibit 3/D series are the Register -D of Mauja 
Gangaprasad, Mauja Bishunpur, Mauja Chakjivan, Mauja Maksa pur 
Chintavan, Mauja Malpur, Mauja Lodipur and Mauja Maksapur y aku.  These 
registers have been produced by the plaintiffs to show tha t there was joint 
account in the name of the 3 brothers and it is specific ally mentioned that the 
properties are Ijmal.  The properties were in the name of  3 brothers in equal 
shares and there was no reference of any partition.  Much  emphasis has been 
given at the time of the hearing of the appeal on the d ifferent entries and 
submitted that all these exhibits point towards the jointness  of all the 3 
brothers and not the separation of Harakh Singh as claimed by the defendants-
appellants.   
(30)      Exhibit-4 series have also been produced to show t hat the 
joint family property was firstly brought in the name of Ra ngoo Singh and 
thereafter by inheritance, Ritlal Singh inherited all the properties.  Exhibit-1 is 
the statement of Ritlal Singh made in the year 1902 in Tit le Suit No.223-224 
of 1900 wherein he has stated that the lands of Mauja Gangapr asad was in 
separate possession of the landlords.  Exhibit-5 is the cer tified copy of the 
decree passed in Title Suit No.456 of 1914.  All these documents r elate to 
prior to 1914.  These are the documentary evidences produced by the 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
22/37 
 
plaintiffs.  
(31)      On the contrary, the defendants have produced var ious 
documents and also examined many witnesses.  D.W.1, Babulal Singh, 
D.W.4, Jugal Kishore Singh, D.W.16, Ved Narayan Singh, D.W.24, 
Rameshwar Rai, D.W.38, Khelo Rai, all have supported the defendant’s case 
and have stated that there had been separation by Harakh Si ngh from his two 
brothers.  D.W.41, Brahmdeo Singh has also stated that there had already 
been partition between the parties.  D.W.7, D.W.8, D.W.18, D.W.35, D.W.40, 
D.W.44 all have supported the case of the defendants that ther e had already 
been partition between the parties.  Likewise, D.W.15, D.W. 17, D.W.47, 
D.W.48 and D.W.51 have also supported about previous partition.  D. W.59 is 
Pratap Narayan Singh who is defendant no.2.  Admittedly, it is the case of the 
plaintiff himself that his father had separated from the s ons of Ritlal Singh. 
Therefore, separation is admitted.  Separate residence i s admitted.  The 
documents produced by the plaintiff relates to the year 1895-96 to  1907-08. 
According to the defendants, there had been partition long long ago prior to 
cadastral survey.  The cadastral survey ended in the year 1902.  In view of the 
above facts, admittedly, this partition alleged by the defendants is one of the 
oldest transactions and it is also admitted that there is no contemporaneous 
documents and most of the persons present in the transacti on or during the 
period of transaction have passed away.  In such circumsta nces, the 
subsequent conducts of the parties are required to be seen.  The defendants-
appellants have produced various documentary evidences.  Exhibi t D/16 to 
D/27, D/32, D/33 and Exhibit T are the sale deeds produced on behalf of  the 
plaintiffs from the period 1918 onwards till 1928 in which the purch asers are 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
23/37 
 
Ritlal Singh’s branch jointly which shows that during this period, i.e., 1918 to 
1928, the branch of Ritlal Singh jointly were acquiring the  properties in their 
separate names.  In none of these deeds, members of the  plaintiffs are 
included.  
(32)    Exhibit F/1 is usufructuary mortgage deed dated 01.05.1923 
executed by ancestors of the defendants-appellants to one Son a Singh.  In this 
deed also, the branch of Harakh Singh are not party.  Exhi bit T is exchange 
deed by which Ritlal Singh exchanged some property to Babu Khubl al Singh. 
Therefore, the mortgagee or this Babu Khublal Singh being s atisfied with the 
ownership of the Ritlal Singh, they were making transacti on with him.  This 
Exhibit T is dated 04.07.1928.  Exhibit DD/1, Exhibit FF, Exhibit F, Exhibi t 
D/2, Exhibit E/1 and Exhibit E read together will prove the fact that the lands 
recorded in the name of Chaman Singh along with Matuki S ingh were dealt 
separately by branch of Harakh Singh.  A mortgage deed was executed on 
20.01.1911 which is Exhibit FF wherein it has clearly been mentioned that the 
property was his “khud hissa”, i.e., his self -property.  This Exhibit FF dated 
20.01.1911 was executed by father of Chaman Singh in favour of Ritlal Singh 
for a period of 7 years.  This document is admittedly an  inter se transaction. 
If the parties were joint, there is no question of maki ng any usufructuary 
mortgage by one coparcener in favour of other coparcener des cribing the 
property as his “khud hissa”.  No doubt, the  property can be transferred by a 
member of the joint family but inter se transaction is strong circumstances to 
prove previous partition as has been held by Division Bench of this court in 
AIR 1977 Patna 59. 
 (33)     It appears from Exhibit F that the property was aga in 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
24/37 
 
mortgaged by Chaman Singh, Matuki Singh and Banarsi Singh to Misri Singh 
and Jalim Singh on 27.06.1931.  In this Exhibit F, it has been me ntioned that 
for legal necessity, Matuki Singh as karta of Harakh Singh  branch executed 
the mortgage deed.  Therefore, if Matuki Singh was karta in  the year 1931 
then how can there be a joint family consisting of the par ties.  According to 
the plaintiffs, after death of Ritlal Singh, Kali Singh  is karta and after his 
death, the son of Kali Singh is karta.  Moreover, if t he parties were joint then 
there cannot be 2 kartas.  Further, this document Exhibit FF shows the 
economic condition of the plaintiff’s branch.  Exhibi t D/2 is the sale deed 
which shows that plaintiff, Banarsi Singh himself on 18.06.1943 sol d the 
property in favour of Baldeo Singh and others.  In the sa id sale deed, it is 
mentioned that for payment of loan and for purchasing ox an d for household 
expenditure, the land was sold.  If this is the statement then how can it be said 
that the parties were joint.  It is not the case of t he plaintiff that he was not 
being maintained by the joint family.  Exhibit E and E/1 are two settlement 
deeds dated 07.11.1950 and 25.01.1952 executed by Banarsi Singh, plaintiff 
no.1 himself and on behalf of his two minor sons in favour of two persons.  In 
Exhibit E/1, it has been mentioned that earlier another m ortgage deed was 
executed in favour of mortgagee and in this Exhibit E/1, he himse lf described 
as karta of his family and he executed this on behalf of his t wo minor sons 
also.  In Exhibit E, the plaintiff, Banarsi took loan o f Rs.76 on 16.11.1951 for 
repayment of loan and for household expenditure.  Theref ore, from these 
Exhibits, it is clear that the branch of Harakh Singh als o was dealing with the 
property separately as exclusive owner thereof and for re payment of loan 
which they took from various persons and that there was int er se transactions 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
25/37 
 
between the parties.  
(34)     Exhibit J is the compromise petition filed by the  branch of 
Ritlal Singh in Title Suit No.50 of 1929 dated 21.02.1932.  This prov es that 
there had been even partition between the sons of Ritla l Singh.  The learned 
counsel for the respondents submitted that no final decree has been produced. 
The plaintiffs were not made party.  Therefore, Exhibit i s not biding.  No 
doubt, this compromise decree will not bind the plaintiff i f it will be proved 
that there had been no partition but if there had been parti tion as alleged by 
the defendants between the sons of Horil Singh then certainly this Exhibit-J is 
a circumstances to show that even the branch of Harakh S ingh is separated by 
compromise decree.  So far non-preparation of final decre e is concerned, the 
compromise decree itself is final decree because the pro perties were allotted 
separately to the parties to compromise and the parties a dmitted their 
possession.  There is no clause in compromise petition regarding any future 
course of action.  In this connection, the decision of the Apex Court in the 
case of Bimal Kumar Vrs. Shakuntala Devi, (2012) 3 Supreme Court 
Cases 548 is very clear.  Therefore, the argument of the learne d counsel for 
the respondent cannot be accepted. 
(35)       Exhibit D/30 is a sale deed dated 19.07.1902.  This sale 
deed has been produced by the defendant to show that properties we re even 
acquired by Ritlal Singh alone in the year 1902 separately.  Exhibit D/20 is 
sale deed dated 11.06.1918 in favour of Kalicharan and Sia Prasa d Singh, 
both sons of Ritlal Singh, Dwarika Singh and Chandrashekh ar Prasad Singh, 
sons of Gopi Singh and grandson of Ritlal Singh.  The e xecutant of the sale 
deed is Nirsu Mahto.  Likewise, these persons acquired the property through 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
26/37 
 
Exhibit D/21, registered sale deed dated 22.07.1918, Exhibit D/22, registe red 
sale deed dated 22.02.1919, Exhibit D/23, D/24 and D/25, all registered sale 
deeds dated 22.02.1919, Exhibit D/31, registered sale deed dated 22.04.1919, 
Exhibit D/17, registered sale deed dated 23.12.1919, Exhibit D/32, registe red 
sale deed dated 20.07.1920, Exhibit D/18, registered sale deed dated 
09.08.1920, Exhibit D/26, registered sale deed dated 17.05.1921, Exhibit 
D/19, registered sale deed dated 18.07.1922.  These sale deeds have be en 
produced by the defendants-appellants to show that when the sons o f Ritlal 
Singh were joint, the properties were being acquired regularly in the names of 
the branch of Ritlal Singh.  From perusal of these sa le deeds, it appears that 
the properties have been acquired in the names of above persons, i.e., the 
branch of Ritlal Singh.  The members or family of Harakh Singh branch is not 
mentioned.  The learned counsel for the plaintiff-respon dent submitted that 
Ritlal Singh was the karta, therefore, all the properties  have been acquired 
either in his name and after his death in the name of his  sons and grandsons. 
In my opinion, this is the only statement made by the pla intiff that Ritlal 
Singh became the karta.  On the contrary, we have discussed the documentary 
evidences above wherein the plaintiff or his father desc ribed them as karta of 
their family.  At this stage, it can safely be said that these are the documents 
which show that the branch of Ritlal Singh were acquiring  the property 
separately.  
(36)     The defendants have also filed Exhibit D/16, sale de ed 
dated 19.06.1925, Exhibit D/27, sale deed dated 08.05.1926, Exhibit D/33, 
sale deed dated 02.07.1928, all these deeds are also in the name of the branch 
of Ritlal Singh.  The learned counsel for the appellan t submitted that these 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
27/37 
 
registered sale deeds show that after partition between the sons of Horil 
Singh, the branch of Ritlal Singh were acquiring the pro perties separately 
when they were joint till they partitioned their properti es by compromise 
decree, Exhibit J.  
(37)     The defendant-appellants have produced Exhibit D/29, 
registered sale deed dated 16.08.1934, Exhibit D/28, registered sale dee d 
dated 21.12.1936 which are in the name of Dwarika Prasad Singh, i.e.,  father 
of defendant nos.4 and 5, i.e., branch of Gopi Singh.  I t may be mentioned 
here that Gopi Singh is first son of Ritlal Singh.  E xhibit D/35 is registered 
sale deed dated 14.05.1943 whereby some properties were sold by Udit 
Narayan Singh, father of defendant nos.19, 20 and 21 i.e., t he branch of Kali 
Singh, the second son of Ritlal Singh.  Exhibit D/3 is sal e deed dated 
11.11.1943 whereby Sia Prasad Singh, father of defendant nos.2 and  3 sold 
some land to Nirsu Rai.  This Sia Prasad Singh is the third son of Ritlal Singh. 
Exhibit D/34 is sale deed dated 04.02.1944 whereby Udit Narayan Singh and 
Shankar Sharan Prasad Singh sold some property to one Ram  Khelawan 
Singh. Exhibit D is sale deed dated 27.11.1951 whereby again Udit Naray an 
Singh sold some property to Ramawtar Singh.  Exhibit D/4 is a registered sale 
deed dated 08.07.1955 whereby said Udit Narayan Singh again sold some 
properties to Ramswarup Singh.  Exhibit D/1 is sale deed dated 04.06.1956 
whereby defendant no.1 sold some properties to Ramawtar Si ngh, by Exhibit 
D/13, registered sale deed dated 23.07.1956, Pratap Narayan Singh and 
Gangotri Prasad Singh, defendant nos.2 and 3 and others sold  some 
properties.  Exhibit D/13, registered sale deed dated 23.07.1956 by whi ch 
they again sold some properties.  Exhibit D/15 is another sal e deed dated 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
28/37 
 
09.06.1960 sold by Udit Narayan Singh, father of defendant nos.19 to  21 to 
Ramawtar Singh.  Likewise, Exhibit D/9 to D/12 are sale deeds dat ed 
25.05.1974 and 08.06.1968 whereby Yadubansh Narayan Singh, defendant 
no.5 and defendant no.1 sold some properties to others.  E xhibit D/5 to D/8 
are the sale deeds dated 18.06.1974 whereby wife of Pratap Narayan  Singh, 
defendant no.2 sold some properties to others.  All these doc uments, i.e., the 
sale deeds from Exhibit D/29 mentioned in this paragraph onwards h ave been 
produced by the defendant-appellant to show that after partition between the 
sons of Ritlal Singh in Partition Suit No.58 of 1929 which was  compromised 
in 1931, the parties were dealing the properties allotted to them  as exclusive 
owner thereof.  The members were either acquiring or selli ng the properties 
independently. 
(38)      Exhibit DD/8 is the khatiyan in the name of Chaman Singh 
and Matuki Singh, sons of Harakh Singh which shows their r esidence 
separately and in the boundary in the south, east and west, the house of Ritlal 
Singh has been mentioned.  In plot no.921, house of Ritla l Singh has been 
mentioned and in the east, house of Chaman Singh has bee n mentioned. 
These Exhibits prove that the parties were residing separately. 
(39)       Exhibit A/28 is the municipal receipts dated 03.03.1939 in 
the name of Chandrashekhar Prasad Singh, Exhibit A/27, muni cipal receipts 
dated 22.01.1944 in the name of Chandrashekhar Prasad Singh, Exhi bit A/15, 
the receipts dated 14.03.1945 in the name of Chandrashekhar Prasa d Singh 
have been filed and likewise, the other Exhibit A series whic h are municipal 
receipts have been filed right from the year 1953 to 1970 which s tands in the 
name of different defendants.  It shows separate residence of the said persons.  
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
29/37 
 
(40)      In view of the above documentary evidences, now it  
becomes clear that the parties were separate in mess,  residence, cultivation 
and business since long, i.e., more than 6-7 decades.  The se documents also 
show that the parties were dealing with the properties separa tely as their 
exclusive properties and enjoying separately the usufruct thereof. 
(41)       The learned counsel for the defendant-appellant  submitted 
that now after such a long period, when no contemporaneous do cuments are 
available and most of the participants in the transactio n i.e., partition, passed 
away and when no direct evidence is available, the parti tion can be presumed 
from the cumulative effect of the separation of the pa rties for last more than 
half century without any objection and also from the subseque nt conduct of 
the parties considering the independent acquisition, independe nt selling and 
also even inter se transactions.  
(42)       On the contrary, the learned counsel for th e plaintiff-
respondent submitted that it is only a cook and bulls story of the appellant that 
Harakh Singh separated from his two brothers.  The parties w ere only 
cultivating the lands according to their convenience.  From Exhibit 3/D which 
is registered deed of Mauja Gangaprasad, it will appear tha t the subtauji 
number is 9 which is Ijmal, Exhibit 3/E which is of Mauja Bish unpur Hemara 
which is Ijmal of three brothers and subtauji no.9, the  separate account 
number of three brothers is 12 of 1880-81 in Register II which  clearly 
indicates that three brothers were joint.  Likewise, the learned counsel 
submitted that Exhibit 3/F is Register D of Mauja Chakjivan wh erein also 
there is equal specification of shares and the account number of three brothers 
is 12 of 1880-81 in Register II.  In Exhibit 3/G, all the three brothers have 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
30/37 
 
been named in entry serial nos.6, 7 and 12 and then in 49 to 51.  The 
specification of the shares is equal.  The learned counse l further submitted 
that in column no.5 in front of entry no.6, 7 and 12, no  subtauji number is 
given but the share has been shown as Ijmal, i.e., joi nt and the separate 
account is same of all the three brothers.  Likewise , the learned counsel 
placed Exhibit 3/H, Register D of Mauja Maksapur Chintavan, Exhi bit 3/I, 
Register D of Mauja Malpur and other Register D of Mauja  Lodipur, Mauja 
Maksapur Yaku etc. and submitted that there is same account a nd the 
properties have been shown Ijmal.  On the strength of th ese Exhibits, the 
learned counsel submitted that the three brothers had equal  shares in all the 
Maujas. Subtauji number of all Maujas is same, account number is same and 
in some of the Exhibits jointness has also been shown and specification of 
shares of all the three brothers was without reference to any partition 
whatsoever.  Therefore, all these documents point towards  the jointness of all 
the three brothers and there is no strength in the stor y put forward by the 
appellants.  The learned counsel further submitted that alm ost all the 
properties were acquired in the name of Ritlal Singh eith er through purchase 
or inheritance who was karta of the family and, therefore,  it is joint family 
property.  The learned counsel placing the Exhibit D series i n its entirety one 
by one submitted that the three brothers were joint which is  mentioned in 
Register D. 
(43)         So far these submissions of the learned couns el is 
concerned, it may be mentioned here that admittedly this R egister D is 
revenue record of right.  It appears that there are many  mistakes in the entry 
and this document is of the year from 1895 to 1907-08.  Theref ore, the right 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
31/37 
 
title and interest of the parties cannot be decided on the basis of this document 
after more than half century. The simple case of the p laintiff is that there had 
been no partition as alleged by the defendant.  We have di scussed the various 
documentary evidences and also the oral evidences.  We have  also seen the 
conduct of the parties and the independent transactions.  
(44)      The learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent relied 
upon the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Bhagwan Dayal vs. 
Masomat Rewati Devi, AIR 1962 SC 287 and submitted that there is  no 
presumption that when one member separates from others, t he later remain 
united.  Whether the later remains united or not must be deci ded on the facts 
of each case.  In the present case, according to the le arned counsel for the 
plaintiff-respondent, the Register D fully support that th e properties were 
never partitioned and as discussed above, the three broth ers were recorded 
Ijmal.  Therefore, on the basis of the evidences it is  apparent that there had 
been no partition as alleged by the defendant-appellant.  Ha d there been 
partition, i.e., separation of Harakh Singh from his two brothers, the property 
could not have been recorded Ijmal in Register D. 
(45)       So far the above submission of the learned co unsel is 
concerned, it can simply be said that we are not investigat ing as to whether 
the entry in the Register D is correct or wrong.  As s tated above these Exhibit 
D series are revenue record and on the basis of the same after more than half 
century, the rights of the parties cannot be determined.  In other words, there 
can be no presumption that a particular state of affai rs which was in existence 
during 1895 to 1907-08 or 1908-09 will continue to exist even after expi ry of 
more than half century.  Here, the partition suit has no t been filed by one of 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
32/37 
 
the brothers rather the suit has been filed by the plai ntiff who himself is 4 th 
generation from the original founder and likewise, some o f the defendants are 
either 4th or 5 th generation from the original founder, Horil Singh.  Th erefore, 
the presumption that Hindu family is presumed to be joint is  almost nil in the 
present case.  
(46)      In the said decision relied upon by the plaintiff-r espondent, 
i.e., Bhagwan Dayal(supra), it has been held by the Apex Court that in the old 
transactions when no contemporaneous documents are mainta ined and when 
most of the active participants in the transactions h ave passed away, though 
the burden still remains on the person who asserts that th ere was a partition, it 
is permissible to fill up gaps more readily by reasonable inferences than in a 
case where the evidence is not obliterated by passage of time.  
(47)      A Division Bench of this court in the case of Arjun Mahto 
vs. Monda Mahatain, AIR 1971 Patna 215  following the decision of the 
Apex Court, Bhagwan Dayal’s case(supra) held that the general  principle is 
that every Hindu family is presumed to be joint unless th e contrary is proved 
but this presumption can be rebutted by direct evidence or by course of 
conduct.  When no contemporaneous documents are available t he question 
whether the parties remain united or separate is to be dec ided on the facts of 
each case.  The partition in such a case can be proved by the intention of the 
parties manifested by their subsequent conduct by their sole  and independent 
enjoyment of the properties.  Separation in food and reside nce for a long time 
among the brothers of a Hindu family, independent transacti ons of property, 
separate possession and enjoyment of properties are by thems elves, no doubt, 
not conclusive but the cumulative effect of such facts may show that there had 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
33/37 
 
been a partition between the brothers during their lifet ime.  It appears that in 
that case before the High court, there was allegation i n the written statement 
that 80 years ago there had been partition between the three brothers.  
(48)      Here, in the present case at our hand, the plai ntiff himself 
in the plaint admitted separate mess, separate cultivation and the documentary 
evidences discussed above clearly shows that the parties were acquiring the 
property and selling the properties independently.  It further appears that there 
are inter se transactions between the parties as far back as in 1911.  Therefore, 
since long the parties are enjoying the properties separatel y as their exclusive 
property.  Separate residence is admitted.  The plaintiff even admitted that the 
sons of Ritlal Singh also separated from each other.  The defendants also 
proved Exhibit J which shows that there had been partition  as far back as in 
the year 1929 by compromise, Exhibit J in Title Suit No.58 of 1929.  
(49)     A Division Bench of this court in the case of Ram 
Bahadur Nath Tiwary vs. Kedar Nath Tiwari and others, AIR 1977 
Patna 59  has held that “separate transactions by members of a joint family 
may not by themselves establish separation, but mutual tran sactions between 
two members of a family stand on an entirely different f ooting and they 
furnish a very strong evidence of separation.”  
(50)      Except Exhibit FF, the mortgage deed dated 20.01.1911 by 
Chaman Singh with Matuki Singh in favour of Ritlal Singh,  the plaintiff 
himself in his evidence admitted that 9 acres and odd was given  by Ritlal 
Singh to him for maintenance.  This fact has also bee n incorporated in 
compromise application, Exhibit J.  It is mentioned there  that about 9 bighas 
land has already been given to the plaintiff’s branch for  maintenance as there 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
34/37 
 
was no property for their maintenance.  If the parties we re joint, there is no 
question of giving maintenance arises by one member to anothe r member or 
by karta to a member of joint family. 
(51)       It may be mentioned here that the Division Benc h of this 
court, i.e., AIR 1971 Patna 215(Arjun Mahto vs. Monda Mahatain)  has 
subsequently been followed in the case of Ganesh Sahu and another vs. 
Dwarika Sao and others, AIR 1991 Patna 1 , Pata Sahu and another vs. 
Hiru Sahu and others, AIR 1991 Patna 276 .  Again in the case of 
Radhamoni Bhuiyanin and others vs. Dibakar Bhuiya and others, AIR 
1991 Patna 95  following the above decisions this court held that it is  now 
well settled that although there is a presumption of joint ness in a Hindu 
family but that presumption is stronger where the parties a re full brothers but 
such presumption gets weaker and weaker as time passes and part ies in 3rd or 
4th generation are presumed to be in separate possession of the lands.  It is 
true that even in a case where a partition has taken p lace and if the share 
allotted to one of the parties is unconsciously disproportionate it is open to the 
court in a given case to reopen partition but in such a c ase the partition is 
admitted and is reopened at the instance of the plainti ffs.  The principle of 
Hindu law is equality of division but inequality of division does not invariably 
lead to the conclusion that there was unequal division of t he lands at the time 
of their partition.  Here also, in the present case, i t is not the case of the 
plaintiff that he is in possession of very meager porti on of the land and also 
there is no pleading about inequality.  Only allegation is tha t according to 
convenience, the sharers started cultivating separate lan ds.  It is not the case 
that they started cultivating unequal shares.  It appears that  in the case of 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
35/37 
 
Radhamoni Bhuiyanin(supra) also it was found that before c adastral survey 
settlement operation the parties were in separate possess ion, separate mess, 
separate residence and separate cultivating possession o f lands in question, 
there had also been separate dealings of the properties amon gst the parties 
inter se.  Therefore, this court held that the conclus ion of the trial court that 
there had been no partition by metes and bounds as such pla intiffs were 
entitled to decree for partition was illegal and the First Appeal was allowed.  
(52)     In the present case at our hand also, from the facts narrated 
above and the documentary evidences and even the pleading s, it is clear that 
since long, i.e., prior to cadastral survey settlement operation, the parties were 
residing separately, messing separately, dealing the property  separately and 
even there is separate selling and inter se transactio ns.  The learned court 
below has not considered the case in the light of these  settled proposition of 
law laid down by the Apex Court as well as by this court an d on the basis of 
the revenue record and on the basis of presumption only hel d that the 
defendants failed to prove partition.  Therefore, in my op inion, the finding of 
the learned court below is unsustainable in the eye of law.   
(53)       In view of my above discussion, I find that th ere had 
already been partition between the parties since long.  Th e defendants-
appellants have been able to rebut the presumption of jo intness and have 
placed reliable circumstances and explained the subsequent co nduct of the 
parties from which it can readily be inferred that there  had already been 
partition.  Therefore, the finding of the learned court below on this point is set 
aside.  
(54)      From the discussion above, it appears that in the year 1967, 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
36/37 
 
for the first time, the plaintiffs-respondents filed the  suit for partition and 
dragged the appellants upto the High Court.  
(55)      In the case of Salem Advocate Bar Association vs. Union 
of India, (2005)6 Supreme Court Cases 344 , the Apex Court held that 
“judicial notice can be taken of the fact that many unsc rupulous parties take 
advantage of the fact that either the costs are not awarded or nominal costs are 
awarded against the unsuccessful party.  Unfortunately, it has  become a 
practice to direct parties to bear their own costs. In a  large number of cases, 
such an order is passed despite Section 35(2) CPC.  Such a pra ctice also 
encourages the filing of frivolous suits.  It also leads t o the taking up of 
frivolous defences.  Further, wherever costs are awarded, ordinarily the same 
are not realistic and are nominal.  When Section 35(2) prov ides for costs to 
follow the event it is implicit that the costs have to be those which are 
reasonably incurred by a successful party except in those c ases where the 
court in its discretion may direct otherwise by recording reasons therefor.”  
(56)     In the present case at our hand as discussed ab ove, in view 
of the above overwhelming evidences produced by the defendants- appellants 
which were within the knowledge of the plaintiff filed the  suit after such a 
long period and even included the properties in the partition s uit which have 
already been sold to third parties and even those properties  which belong to 
the strangers.  Therefore, in my opinion, this is a fit  case where the plaintiffs-
respondents are liable to pay cost. 
(57)     In the result, this First Appeal is allowed.  Th e impugned 
judgment and decrees are set aside and the plaintiff’s sui t for partition is 
dismissed with cost to be borne by the plaintiff throughou t and in addition to 
Patna High Court FA No.764 of 1977 dt.17-04-2012 
 
37/37 
 
that, the plaintiffs are liable to pay the cost of R s. 25,000 to the appellants 
within two months from today failing which the appellants are  at liberty to 
realize the same through the process of the court.   
 
 
 
 
Saurabh/A.F.R. 
(Mungeshwar Sahoo, J) 
 
