Source: AWS Open Data - indian-high-court-judgments/data/pdf/year=1992/court=27_1/bench=newos/HCBM020085531989_1_2008-08-30.pdf
Ref: data/pdf/year=1992/court=27_1/bench=newos/HCBM020085531989_1_2008-08-30.pdf

                                -:  1  :-
                  IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
                    ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION
                      COMPANY PETITION NO.626 OF 1989
                               In the matter of M/s.Intex Computers
                               Pvt. Ltd. (in Liqn.)
             Omega Power System                         : Petitioner
                                 ...
             Mr.Snehal Shah with Ms Mahek Bookwala i/b. Sajjal Patel
             for purchaser.
             Mr.Arif Bookwala for society.
             Ms Soumya Srikrishna for Bank of Baroda.
             Mrs.Aruna Pai for Official Liquidator.
                                 ...
                                          CORAM : S.A. BOBDE, J.
                                          DATE : AUGUST 30, 2008.
             ORAL ORDER:
             1.   The  Official  Liquidator  has in  his  report  dated
             24.3.2008 prayed for an order declaring the sale conducted
             for satisfaction of the society's dues as void in terms of
             section 537(1) of the Companies Act, 1956.
             2.    The  Official  Liquidator   has  been  appointed  as
             Liquidator   of  M/s.Intex  Computers   Pvt.   Ltd.    (in
             liquidation)  by  this Court in pursuance of an order  for
             winding  up  of  the  company passed  on  15.1.1992.   The
                                -:  2  :-
             relevant  facts  leading  to the sale at the  instance  of
             M/s.Hansa  "D"  Industrial Premises  Co-operative  Society
             Ltd.,  which  is  now  sought  to be  set  aside,  are  as
             follows:-
                     On 14.6.2000 an award was passed by the Registrar
             of  Co-operative  Societies  under  section  101  of  the
             Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960, hereinafter
             referred  to as the "Co-operative Societies Act", on  the
             application made by the society as a claimant against the
             company  i.e.   Intex  Computers Pvt.   ltd.,  which  was
             arraigned  as  an  opponent.  The claim was made  by  the
             society  for  arrears of maintenance.   The  Co-operative
             Court  passed an award in the sum of Rs.2,83,328.44  with
             interest  at  12% per annum from  1.6.2000.   Apparently,
             settlement  between  the parties failed and  the  society
             wrote  a  letter to the company to clear the  outstanding
             dues as per the award dated 14.6.2000.  The company which
             was then in liquidation did not comply with the demand of
             the  society  and,  therefore, the  society  applied  for
             warrant  of  execution  in execution of  the  award.   On
             13.8.2004  the  warrant for sale of the property and  for
             recovery of a sum of Rs.4,14,949.32 was issued.  The sale
             of  the  property was duly advertised.  The property  was
             sold  by way of public auction after due publicity.  Four
             bids were received by the Sheriff pursuant to the auction
                                -:  3  :-
             purchase.   This Court in Execution Application no.384 of
             2003  recorded that the highest bidder has raised his bid
             to Rs.40,00,000/-, after directing that notices be issued
             to  the  other  bidders to ascertain  whether  they  were
             interested  in raising their bids and the Court  directed
             sale of the property in the sum of Rs.40,00,000/-.  After
             sale, the Sheriff submitted a report to the learned Judge
             taking  up  execution application and the  learned  Judge
             made  the  Sheriff's report absolute in terms  of  prayer
             clauses  (a)  to (h) directing that upon the dues of  the
             society being paid in full as per the decree, the society
             shall  hand over all documents, deeds and writing to  the
             auction   purchaser.    This  was  by  an   order   dated
             14.12.2007.   The  said  amount   of  Rs.40,00,000/-   is
             admittedly lying in this Court.
             3.  The Official Liquidator has applied for setting aside
             of  the  sale by public auction under section 537 of  the
             Companies Act which reads as follows:-
                     "537.   Avoidance  of certain  attachments,
                     executions,   etc.,   in   winding  up   by
                     Tribunal.--  (1) Where any company is being
                     wound up by Tribunal--
                        (a)  any    attachment,     distress   or
                                -:  4  :-
                             execution  put  in   force,  without
                             leave  of  the Tribunal against  the
                             estate  or  effects of the  company,
                             after   the  commencement   of   the
                             winding up;  or
                        (b)  any  sale held, without leave of the
                             Tribunal of any of the properties or
                             effects  of  the company after  such
                             commencement
                     shall be void.
                     (2)  Nothing in this section applies to any
                     proceedings  for the recovery of any tax or
                     impost   or  any  dues   payable   to   the
                     Government."
             There  is  no  dispute that the property of  the  company
             which  was  being wound up was being sold by  the  Court.
             However,  it is clear that the sale without permission of
             the  Court  shall  be void only where section  537  would
             apply.
             4.   Mr.Bookwala,  the learned counsel for  the  society,
             opposes  the  prayer  of the Official  Liquidator,  inter
                                -:  5  :-
             alia,  on the ground that having regard to the scheme  of
             the  Companies Act under which the company is being wound
             up  and the Co-operative Societies Act which governs  the
             property  in  question  belonging  to  the  company,  the
             Company  Court has no jurisdiction to adjudicate upon and
             set  aside  the  sale conducted  under  the  Co-operative
             Societies Act.
             5.   The  relevant  provisions of the two  Acts  must  be
             examined to appreciate the contention.
             6.   The Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960  is
             an  enactment  under  Entry  32 of  List  II  of  Seventh
             Schedule  of the Constitution of India which empowers the
             State Legislature to legislate on co-operative societies.
             It  is necessary to see how the Act operates in  relation
             to  a  dispute regarding the property of  a  co-operative
             society held by a person, including a company and further
             see  which  Court  has jurisdiction in relation  to  such
             dispute.   Section  91 of the Co-operative Societies  Act
             makes  a  dispute, inter alia, between a society and  its
             member,   such  as  the  present   one,  triable   by   a
             Co-operative Court.  Section 91(3) provides that no Court
             shall  have  jurisdiction to entertain any suit or  other
             proceedings  in  respect  of any dispute referred  to  in
             sub-section  (1),  save  as   otherwise  provided   under
                                -:  6  :-
             sub-section  (2)  of  section  93.   Sub-section  (3)  of
             section 91 reads as follows:-
                     "(3)  Save  as   otherwise  provided  under
                     sub-section  (2)  of section 93,  no  Court
                     shall  have  jurisdiction to entertain  any
                     suit or other proceedings in respect of any
                     dispute referred to in sub-section (1)."
             Section  163  of  the  Co-operative  Societies  Act  bars
             jurisdiction of other Courts in the following terms:-
                     "163.  Bar of jurisdiction of Courts.-- (1)
                     Save  as expressly provided in this Act, no
                     Civil  or  Revenue  Court  shall  have  any
                     jurisdiction in respect of--
                     (a)   ................................
                     (b)   ................................
                     (c)   ................................
                      (2) ................................
                     (3)  All orders, decisions or awards passed
                     in  accordance  with this Act or the  rules
                     shall, subject to the provisions for appeal
                     or  revision in this Act be final;  and  no
                                -:  7  :-
                     such  order,  decision  or award  shall  be
                     liable   to  be   challenged,  set   aside,
                     modified,  revised or declared void in  any
                     Court  upon  the merits or upon  any  other
                     ground whatsoever."
             7.   Section 167 of the Co-operative Societies Act  reads
             as follows:-
                     "167.   Companies  Act not to apply.--  For
                     the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared
                     that  the provisions of the Companies  Act,
                     1956,   shall   not   apply  to   societies
                     registered  or  deemed  to  be  registered;
                     under this Act."
             From  the above provisions, it is clear that the  dispute
             which  has  resulted in the sale in question was  triable
             exclusively  by a Co-operative Court under section 91  of
             the   Co-operative  Societies  Act.    No  other   Court,
             including  the  Company  Court, has any  jurisdiction  to
             entertain  the dispute.  All orders, decisions and awards
             passed  in accordance with the Co-operative Societies Act
             were immune from challenge or modification or revision in
             any  Court  upon  the  merits or upon  any  other  ground
             whatsoever,  vide section 163(3).  In any event,  section
                                -:  8  :-
             167 of the Co-operative Societies Act makes it clear that
             the  Companies Act will have no application to  societies
             registered under the Co-operative Societies Act.
             8.   Mrs.Pai,  the  learned   counsel  for  the  Official
             Liquidator,  submitted  that  since the  company  was  in
             liquidation  and  since the property of the  company  has
             been  sold,  such  sale  and appropriation  of  the  sale
             proceeds  by  the society would be in breach  of  section
             529-A  of  the Companies Act, 1956, which lays  down  the
             priority  according  to  which the debts of  the  company
             shall  be  paid.  This contention cannot be  accepted  in
             view  of  the  scheme of the Co-operative  Societies  Act
             which   exclusively  governs    co-operative   societies,
             including all disputes in relation to the property of the
             society  between itself and its members.  Any dispute  in
             relation to the property of a co-operative society is not
             governed  by the provisions of the Act, having regard  to
             the  provisions  of  section   167  of  the  Co-operative
             Societies Act which declares that the Companies Act shall
             not  apply  to  co-operative  societies.   The  words  of
             section  167 have a wide import and it is clear that  the
             intention  of the Legislature is to remove any doubt that
             the  provisions  of  the  Companies   Act  may  apply  to
             co-operative   societies.   Thus,  the   property  of   a
             co-operative society and the disputes between its members
                                -:  9  :-
             and the society in relation thereto cannot be affected by
             the  provisions of winding up contained in the  Companies
             Act.
             9.   Mr.Bookwala, the learned counsel for the society  in
             support  of his submission that the proceedings under the
             Co-operative  Societies Act which culminated in the  sale
             of  the  company's property in favour of  a  co-operative
             society,  relied on the decision of the Supreme Court  in
             Damji  v.   L.I.C.  of India (AIR 1966 SC 135) where  the
             question  was  whether section 446 of the  Companies  Act
             which mandates that no suit or legal proceedings shall be
             commenced  or  continued against the company except  with
             the  leave  of  the Company Court could  operate  on  the
             proceedings  which  were pending before the  Tribunal  or
             which  may  be  sought to be commenced  before  it.   The
             Supreme  Court  considered the provisions of  winding  up
             under  the  Companies  Act  and section 41  of  the  Life
             Insurance Corporation Act which is similar to section 163
             of the Co-operative Societies Act barred the jurisdiction
             of  all civil Courts to entertain or adjudicate upon  any
             matter  which  the  Tribunal  under  the  Life  Insurance
             Corporation Act is empowered to decide or determine under
             that  Act.  The Supreme Court observed in paragraphs  17,
             18 and 19 as follows:-
                                -:  10  :-
                     "(17)  In this connection, reference may be
                     made  to  S.   41  of  the  LIC  Act  which
                     provides  that  no civil Court  shall  have
                     jurisdiction  to  entertain  or  adjudicate
                     upon  any  matter  which   a  Tribunal   is
                     empowered to decide or determine under that
                     Act.   It is not disputed that the Tribunal
                     had   jurisdiction   to    entertain    the
                     application   of   the    Corporation   and
                     adjudicate  on the matters raised  thereby.
                     The   Tribunal  is   given  the   exclusive
                     jurisdiction over this matter.
                     (18)  It  is  in   view  of  the  exclusive
                     jurisdiction  which Sub-s.  (2) of S.   446
                     of the Companies Act confers on the company
                     Court  to entertain or dispose of any  suit
                     or  proceeding  by or against a company  or
                     any  claim  made by or against it that  the
                     restriction  referred  to in Sub-s.(1)  has
                     been  imposed  on the commencement  of  the
                     proceedings   or  proceeding    with   such
                     proceedings  against  a   company  after  a
                     winding-up order has been made.  In view of
                     S.  41 of the LIC Act the company Court has
                     no jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate
                                -:  11  :-
                     upon  any  matter  which  the  Tribunal  is
                     empowered to decide or determine under that
                     Act.   It is not disputed that the Tribunal
                     has jurisdiction under the Act to entertain
                     and  decide matters raised in the  petition
                     filed  by  the Corporation under S.  15  of
                     the  LIC  Act.   It must  follow  that  the
                     consequential  provisions of Sub-s.  (1) of
                     S.   446  of  the Companies  Act  will  not
                     operate on the proceedings which be pending
                     before  the Tribunal or which may be sought
                     to be commenced before it.
                     (19) Further, the provisions of the special
                     Act  i.e.,  the LIC Act, will override  the
                     provisions  of  the general Act, viz.,  the
                     Companies  Act which is an Act relating  to
                     companies in general."
             It  is  clear that the ratio of the decision  in  Damji's
             case  (supra) applies to the scheme of the Companies  Act
             and  the  Co-operative  Societies  Act  involved  in  the
             present  case and that the provisions of the Co-operative
             Societies  Act  must be treated as those of  special  Act
             which  relate  to  co-operative societies  in  particular
             which  override  the provisions of the general  Act  i.e.
                                -:  12  :-
             the  Companies  Act  which  is an  Act  relating  to  the
             companies in general.
             10.  Similarly, the observations relevant to the  present
             dispute  were made by a Constitution Bench of the Supreme
             Court  in  S.V.  Kandeakar v.  V.M.  Deshpande [(1972)  1
             SCC 438] wherein in paragraph 17, it has been observed as
             follows:-
                     "Looking at the legislative history and the
                     scheme  of the Companies Act,  particularly
                     the  language  of  Section 446, read  as  a
                     whole,   the   expression    "other   legal
                     proceeding"  in  sub-section  (1)  and  the
                     expression    "legal      proceeding"    in
                     sub-section  (2) convey the same sense  and
                     the  proceedings  in both the  sub-sections
                     must  be such as can appropriately be dealt
                     with   by  the  winding   up  court.    The
                     Income-tax Act is a complete code and it is
                     particularly   so  with   respect  to   the
                     assessment and re-assessment of Income-tax.
                     The  fact  that  after the  amount  of  tax
                     payable  by an assessee has been determined
                     or  quantified,  its   realisation  from  a
                     company  in liquidation is governed by  the
                                -:  13  :-
                     Act  because  the income-tax  payable  also
                     being  a  debt has to rank pari passu  with
                     other  debts due from the company does  not
                     mean  that  the assessment proceedings  for
                     computing the amount of tax must be held to
                     be such other legal proceedings as can only
                     be  started or continued with the leave  of
                     the  liquidation court under Section 446 of
                     the  Act.   The  liquidation  court  cannot
                     perform   the  functions    of   Income-tax
                     Officers  while assessing the amount of tax
                     payable  by  the  assessee   even  if   the
                     assessee  be  the  company which  is  being
                     wound up by the court."
             The earlier decision of the Supreme Court in Damji's case
             was expressly approved in this case.
             11. In Allahabad Bank v.  Canara Bank [(2000) 4 SCC 406],
             the  Supreme Court observed in paragraphs 30 and 31 where
             the  question was whether leave of the Company Court  was
             necessary  to  proceed  with  a  claim  before  the  Debt
             Recovery  Tribunal or in respect of execution proceedings
             before  the Recovery Officer that there was no such  need
             to  seek  leave  of the Company Court  since  the  latter
             proceedings  could  not  be transferred  to  the  Company
                                -:  14  :-
             Court, vide paragraph 30.
             12.   Recently,  in Greater Bombay Coop.  Bank  Ltd.   v.
             United  Yarn  Tex  (P) Ltd.  [(2007) 6  SCC  236],  while
             considering  the  scheme of the Recovery of Debts Due  to
             Banks  and  Financial  Institutions  Act,  1993  and  the
             Co-operative  Societies Act, Their Lordships reversed the
             judgement  of  this  Court which held  that  Co-operative
             Banks  are  banking companies within the meaning  of  the
             Banking  Regulation Act and, therefore, the provisions of
             the  Recovery  of  Debts  Due   to  Banks  and  Financial
             Institutions  Act,  1993 were applicable to  recovery  of
             dues  by  the co-operative bank from their  members,  and
             observed  that  the  Co-operative  Societies  Act  was  a
             complete  self-contained Code which governs the  recovery
             of dues of the co-operative society.
             13.  In view of the aforesaid decision, it is clear  that
             the  Co-operative Societies Act is a self-contained  Code
             and  confers  exclusive jurisdiction on the  Co-operative
             Courts  for  adjudication of disputes arising under  that
             Act  and the Companies Act, 1956 cannot deal with any  of
             the   disputes  within  the   exclusive  domain  of   the
             Co-operative  Court nor can entertain any proceedings for
             setting  aside  the orders passed under the  Co-operative
             Societies  Act.   Therefore, the prayer of  the  Official
                                -:  15  :-
             Liquidator  that  the sale conducted in pursuance of  the
             award of the Co-operative Court be declared void in terms
             of section 547 of the Companies Act cannot be entertained
             and is hereby rejected.  Order accordingly.
                                                  S.A. BOBDE, J.
