Source: AWS Open Data - indian-high-court-judgments/data/pdf/year=1993/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010392301993_1_2009-07-27.pdf
Ref: data/pdf/year=1993/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010392301993_1_2009-07-27.pdf

 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL No.316 OF 1993
 
With 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 351 of 1993 
 
Against the judgment of conviction and 
order of sentence dated 7 th September, 
1993 and 8 th September,  1993 passed 
by Sri Kapileshwar Prasad, 10 th 
Additional Sessions Judge, Rohtas at 
Sasaram in Sessions Trial No. 79/66 of 
1989. 
********* 
1. LAL MUNI RAM  
2. BIGU RAM 
3. NUSAH RAM 
4. BHOLA RAM 
5. SIPAHI RAM 
6. INAR RAM @ INDRA RAM 
                                           ……………. APPELLANTS (Cr. Appl. No. 316/1993 SJ)  
 1.  RAMASHRAY RAM     …………….. APPELLANT  (Cr. Appl. No. 351/1993 SJ) 
                                      
VERSUS 
STATE OF BIHAR           ………………….RESPONDNET 
***************** 
 For the Appellants    :-  Mr. Kamal Nayan Choubey, Sr. Advocate 
       Mr. nagendra Dubey, Advocate 
       Mr. Sunil Kumar Singh, Advocate 
 For the State    :- Mr. Ali Mozaffar, APP 
       Mr. Azeem, APP 
 For the Informant    :- Mr. Kamlakant Pandey, Advocate 
********************* 
P R E S E N T
 
 
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SHYAM KISHORE SHARMA 
 
 
 
 S. K. Sharma, J. Both the above noted appeals have arisen out of a 
common judgment by which the above named appellants have 
been convicted and sentenced vide judgment and order dated 7 th 
September, 1993 and 8 th September, 1993 respectively passed by 
the 10th Additional Sessions Judge, Rohtas at Sasaram in Sessions 
Trial No. 79/66 of 1989. 
Appellants Lalmuni Ram, Bigu Ram, Nusha Ram, Bhola 
 
 
2 
Ram, Sipahi Ram and Indra Ram were convicted under sections 
149/304 Part I  of the Indian Penal Code and were sentenced to 
undergo rigorous imprisonment for 10 years. The appellant 
Ramashray Ram was convicted under section 304 Part I of the 
Indian Penal Code and was sentenced to undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for 10 years. Appellants Ramashray Ram, Bhola Ram 
and Indra Ram were also convicted under section 27 of the Arms 
Act and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 2 years. 
However, it is ordered that all the sentences will run concurrently.     
The basis of the prosecution case is a fard beyan given by 
Ram Dhyan Paswan before the A.S.I. of Nokha Police Station on 
14.7.1988 at 4.00 P.M. in which he stated that at 12.30 P.M. on 
14.7.1988 the informant and his brother deceased Ram Dahin 
Paswan  were proceeding for taking meal. While they were in front 
of the house of appellant Lalmuni Ram then his nephew met and 
informed that Ramashray Ram and Lalmuni Ram were cutting the 
Behaya plant from the land of the State of Bihar but the said land 
was  filled up by them. The informant asked as to why they were 
cutting then they were called in the evening. The appellants Lalmuni 
Ram, Bigu Ram were carrying lathi, Nusah Ram were armed with 
Garansa and Bhola Ram, Ramashray Ram and Indra Ram were 
armed with country made gun. Sipahi Ram was carrying a lathi. All 
came from various directions and all of them encircled the informant 
and his brother. Ramashray Ram fired which caused injury to Ram 
Dahin Paswan on his abdomen who fell down. At that time 
 
 
3 
informant tried to save himself but as the accused persons were 
many in number, the informant was assaulted. Lalmuni Ram, Nusah 
Ram assaulted the informant by lathi and Garansa respectively 
which caused head injury to the informant. Hearing the sound of 
assault Dandan Paswan, Hira Lal Paswan, Ajay Kumar Paswan 
and Chhatu Paswan rushed there and the accused persons 
escaped. Informant’s mother Anurajiya and aunt Phulbasiya, 
neighbour Bhanu Paswan, also rushed and witnessed the 
occurrence. Ram Dahin Paswan was taken to Nokha State 
Dispensary. Other injured persons were also taken for treatment. 
Ram Dahin Paswan was in bad state of health. So he could not 
make his statement. Information was given by the informant which 
led to registration of the case under sections 307, 147, 148, 149, 
323, 324/34 of the Indian Penal Code and section 27 of the Arms 
Act.  Injured Ram Dahin Paswan died in S.S.P.G. Hospital, 
Varanasi on 15.7.2008. So section 302 of the Indian Penal Code 
was added.  After investigation charge-sheet was submitted under 
section 302 and some other sections of the Indian Penal Code and 
section 27 of the Arms Act. After taking cognizance case was 
committed where the charges were explained to the accused 
persons when they pleaded innocence then trial proceeded. 
The defence of the appellants was of total denial of the 
time and place of occurrence as given by the informant. Appellant 
Ramashray Ram took plea of alibi also but it was taken for the first 
time when his statement under section 313 of the Cr.P.C. was 
 
 
4 
recorded. 
The prosecution has examined 8 witnesses to prove its 
case. They are PW 1 Hiralal Paswan, PW 2 Ajay Paswan, PW 3 
Chathu Paswan,  PW 4 the informant Ram Dhyan Paswan, PW 5 I. 
O. Bacha Singh, PW 6 Sushil Kumar Tripathi, PW 7 Dr. C. B. 
Tripathi and PW 8 Bijay Kant Tiwary who is a formal witness who 
proved the fard beyan and formal FIR (Ext. 6 & 7 respectively). 
Death of injured Ram Dahin Paswan is not in dispute. The 
death has been proved by PW 7 who has conducted the post 
mortem of Ram Dahin Paswan at 5 P.M. on 16.7.1998  at Varanasi. 
The cause of death was the ante mortem injury which was gun shot 
wound of entrance- 3/4 C.M. in diameter circular over front of left 
side abdomen 3 C.M. form midline and 3 C.M. below umbilicus with 
margin inverted and contused.  The missile has passed through 
abdominal wall perforating small intestine at multiple places. The 
death is not under challenge and it is also not under challenge that 
the death was on account of ante mortem firearm injury.           
The informant PW 4 has deposed that on the date of 
occurrence in the evening he and his brother were returning to their 
home for having their meal. When they reached in front of the 
house of Lalmuni Ram then they met with his nephew Devidayal 
who told that Ramashray, Lalmuni etc. were harvesting Behaya 
plants from the land of the Bihar Government. That land was filled 
up by the prosecution party, so they were aggrieved. The matter 
was taken up. Then it was decided that it would be sorted out in the 
 
 
5 
evening. In the meanwhile Lalmuni, Bighu having lathi, Nusah 
having garansa, Ramashray, Bhola and Indra having guns and 
Sipahi came from various directions and they encircled  the 
prosecution party. Ramashray fired causing injury  on the abdomen 
of the informant’s brother Ram Dahin Paswan who fell  down and 
when the informant tried  to save himself then Lalmuni gave a lathi 
blow on his head. Nusah used his Garansa but it missed the target. 
There was profuse bleeding. On the shout of the informant PW 1, 
Hiralal Paswan, PW 2 Ajay  Kumar, PW 3 Chhatu Paswan, the 
informant’s mother Anurajiya  and Phulbasiya assembled   and the 
mother Anurajiya was assaulted by Sipahi with lathi. All the injured 
were brought for treatment to Nokha hospital. On account of the 
assault the informant’s brother remained unconscious and so he did 
not make his fard beyan. The fard beyan was recorded by the 
police which led to registration of a formal FIR. The fard beyan was 
having signature of informant (Ext-1). The informant has described 
that after occurrence his seriously injured brother was taken to 
Sasaram hospital and thereafter to BHU for advance treatment but 
before proper treatment could be made available he died on the 
next day. The informant had gone to Varanasi. The post mortem 
was conducted. About other witnesses present at the time of 
occurrence namely Phulwasia it was stated that her being of 
advanced age between 82-90 years she was not in a position to 
come and depose.  It was also stated that mentally she is not sane.  
The informant was cross-examined  and he described the 
 
 
6 
manner of assault. The informant has not stated about the plot or 
khata number of the land which was the bone of contention but has 
supported consistently about the assault. His evidence is 
consistent. Although he has been cross-examined in detail but 
prosecution has not been able to get any vital contradiction in his 
evidence. His cross examination has led to nothing.  
PW 1 has supported the version of the informant. He has 
been examined as an eye-witness to the occurrence. He has stated 
that at the time of occurrence he was in his house near the place of 
occurrence. He has supported the charge that mother of Ram 
Dhyan namely, Anurajiya Devi, aunt Phulwasia Devi and Bhanu 
Ram were also assaulted and the occurrence was seen by others 
also. In the cross-examination of this witness the defence has also 
tried to suggest that he is an interested witness because the 
deceased was his uncle in village relationship. The defence has 
suggested that he had come to the place of occurrence after the 
occurrence so he is not the eye witness and he is giving incorrect 
evidence.  The entire cross examination of the PW 1 is in line with 
examination-in-chief in which he has described the manner of 
occurrence and from the evidence it appears that the prosecution 
has been able to prove beyond all reasonable doubts that he was 
present at the time of occurrence and the alleged assault, therefore, 
evidence of PW 1 remained intact. 
PW 2 was sitting at Darwaja at the time of occurrence 
which was situated near the place of occurrence. He saw Ram 
 
 
7 
Dahin and Ram Dhyan coming and as soon as they arrived near 
the house of Lalmuni Ram,  all the accused persons came from 
different directions variously armed and assaulted. He has 
described the weapons and mode of assault made on the injured 
and deceased. He has also been cross-examined in detail. The 
defence has tried to give suggestion that he is not the eye-witness 
to the occurrence but he consistently stated that there was assault 
by the appellants on the date, time and at the place of occurrence. 
PW 3 has been brought as eye witness to the occurrence 
and he has stated that how the occurrence started, continued and 
terminated. He has described the manner of occurrence and he has 
remained firm so far as his testimony is concerned.  
PW 5 was the second investigating officer of the case who 
has taken over the charge of investigation from the first I. O. 
Ramchandra Yadav because he was transferred elsewhere.  After 
taking over the charge of the case he visited the place of 
occurrence on 26.8.1988 and examined the informant. He has 
described the place of occurrence which was a public lane running 
from east to west which was having ten feet width and it was 
situated in Harijan Toli which was in the south of the village Sisirit. 
House of Lalmuni Ram was situated in the south of the lane and it 
was facing north. House of Bighu Ram was adjacent to the house of 
Lalmuni Ram. House of Sadhu Paswan and Bahulal Paswan were 
also there. PW 5 has taken statements of other witnesses also. He 
has stated that Dr. Arun Kumar Upadhyay of  Sadar Hospital has 
 
 
8 
recorded dying declaration of injured Ram Dahin Paswan at 8.00 
P.M. on 14.7.1988 in Sadar Hospital at Sasaram which was proved 
by PW 5 (Ext-2). He has described the manner of recording the 
dying declaration and has stated that the doctor has taken the L.T.I. 
of Ram Dahin who died in Varanasi. He was transferred so he 
handed over the charge on 5.10.1988  to S. I. Later on charge-
sheet was submitted. This witness got information regarding death 
when he went to the office. The defence has tried to suggest  that 
there was no dying declaration and the same was a fabricated 
document.  
Informant PW 4 has stated about the assault which had  
taken place  in front of the house of Lalmuni Ram. PW 5 has thus 
established the existence of place of occurrence because other 
witnesses namely, the informant and others have also stated the 
same fact and there is no contradictions at all in the evidences of 
any witness with regard to manner of assault.  
The contention of the defence is that first and third 
investigating officers were not examined which has caused grave 
prejudice to the defence because the defence has not been able to 
take out the contradictions of the evidences of PWs 1, 2 and 3 who 
have been allegedly examined as eye witness but in fact they were 
not the eye witness.  
It appears from the record that the court has taken all 
steps to procure the attendance of the investigating officers but 
when they did not appear then the court had no option but to rely 
 
 
9 
upon the evidences which have come in course of the evidence 
which were led by the prosecution. The doctor of BHU was already 
examined. He has proved the death.  
Vital lacuna in the prosecution case remained due to non-
proving of the dying declaration which was recorded by the doctor 
of Sasaram. It was formally proved. There was no report  that 
doctor A. K. Upadhyay was not available and as to how he could 
not be examined. This fact was considered prominently by the 
Presiding Officer, the Additional Sessions Judge, and non-
examination of the person who has recorded the dying declaration 
has definitely gone in favour of the defence to the extent that the 
recorder of the statement was not examined. There are consistent 
evidences that on the date and time of occurrence the appellants 
formed an unlawful assembly from which fatal shot was given by 
Ramashray Ram  and others have also caused injuries and so  they 
are also held guilty. I find no infirmity with the findings of the trial 
court so far as the charges are concerned.  
It has been submitted by the counsel for the appellants 
that Ramashray has remained in custody for more than five years 
and others have also remained in custody for considerably longer 
time during the trial and after their conviction. The appellants are 
not the hardened criminal and no previous convictions were proved 
against them. So lenient view is required to be taken by granting 
minor punishment.  
This prayer has been opposed by the counsel for the 
 
 
10 
informant who has submitted that it was a gross case of high 
handedness.  
The instant case is of the year 1988  and since then 21 
years have passed. There is no adverse report regarding the 
conduct of the either of the appellants  and all the appellants were 
of the advanced age because age of Lalmuni Ram was 45 years, 
Bigu Ram was 45 years, Bhola Ram was 32 years, Ramashray 
Ram was 27 years, Sipahi Ram was 40 years of age and Indra 
Ram was aged 35 years all in the year 1993. So it has been 
submitted that all of them have become of advanced age and they 
have been sufficiently been punished. 
I have considered the submissions with regard to quantum 
of sentence. The appellant who has been convicted for ten years 
has remained in custody for five years. Similarly other appellants 
have also remained in custody for different periods for many 
months in course of trial. So I am in agreement with the submission 
of the learned counsel for the appellants that in the interest of 
justice the sentences are required to be modified. It is accordingly 
modified that the period undergone by the appellants shall be 
deemed to be sufficient for the ends of justice. With the aforesaid 
modification in sentence these appeals are dismissed.    
                                            
 
 (Shyam Kishore Sharma,  J.) 
 
Patna High Court, 
Dated 27th July, 2009 
N.A.F.R./avin 
