Source: AWS Open Data - indian-high-court-judgments/data/pdf/year=1993/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010204361993_1_2009-05-01.pdf
Ref: data/pdf/year=1993/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010204361993_1_2009-05-01.pdf

 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL No.340 OF 1993
 
 
Against the judgment and order dated 
30.9.1993/5.10.1993 passed by Sri 
Krishna Mohan Srivastava, IInd 
Additional Sessions Judge, Bhagalpur in 
Sessions Trial No. 543 of 1988 arising 
out of G.R. Case No. 1223 of 1986. 
 
 
 
1. MOHAN YADAV, son of Late Mahendra Yadav 
2. Gutuk @ Gudka Yadav, son of Bouni Yadav 
Both residents of Nirhatti, P.S.- Sultanganj, District- Bhagalpur 
                                                  ----- Appellants 
 
                                     Versus 
 
THE STATE OF BIHAR                                      ----- Respondent 
 
With 
 
CR. APP (SJ)  No.5 oF  1994
 
 
 
GORIL YADAV @ GORELAL YADAV, son of Late Sattan Yadav, resident of village- 
Mirhatti, P.S.- Sultanganj, District- Bhagalpur 
                                                        ----- Appellant 
 
                                     Versus 
 
THE STATE OF BIHAR                                      ----- Respondent 
 
For the appellants in Cr.Appeal No. 340/1993:- Mr. Jawahar Pd. Karn,Sr. Adv. 
For the appellant in Cr. Appeal No. 5/1994  :- Mr. Uma Kant Prasad, Adv. 
                                               Mr. Rajib Ranjan Singh, Adv. 
For the State                               :- Mr. R.N. Jha, A.P.P. 
 
 
P R E S E N T 
 
THE HON'BLE JUSTICE SMT. SHEEMA ALI KHAN
 
 
 
 
 
 
 S.A. Khan, J. The three appellants in these two 
criminal appeals have challenged the judgment 
and order dated 30.9.1993 passed by the IInd 
Additional Sessions Judge, Bhagalpur in Sessions 
Trial No. 543 of 1988.  By the impugned judgment 
 
 
2 
and order, the appellants have been convicted to 
undergo R.I. for 7 years for offences alleged to 
have been committed under Section 304 part I/34 
of the Indian Penal Code. 
The prosecution case is that Sebi 
Mandal, the deceased in this case gave his 
‘Fardbeyan’ at Sultanganj hospital on 28.10.1980 
in which he has stated that he was ploughing the 
field when the appellants who were armed with 
‘Lathi’ came to the field and began to assault 
him on his legs, knees, hands etc.  It is 
alleged that Mohan Yadav and Goril Yadav 
assaulted him on his body whereas others 
assaulted on other parts of the body.  Sebi 
Mandal has stated that the Jagdish Mukhiya P.W. 
1, Tarni Mandal P.W. 2, Ram Swaroop Mandal were 
also present at the place of occurrence. 
The case of the prosecution has been 
supported by P.Ws. 1, 2 and 3 who are said to be 
the independent witnesses in this case.  P.W. 3, 
Dinesh Mandal has a plot of land on the boundary 
of the land which was being ploughed by Sebi 
Mandal, and as such he is said to have seen the 
occurrence from his field whereas P.Ws. 1 and 2 
while going to the adjoining village to buy 
 
 
3 
mangoes had seen Sebi Mandal ploughing the field 
and while returning they claim to have witnessed 
the occurrence.  All the witnesses have 
supported the fact that the appellants alongwith 
one Babu Yadav who died during the trial of the 
case were assaulting Sebi Mandal with ‘Lathis’.  
It has also been alleged by P.W.4 Sarjug Mandal 
the father of Sebi Mandal that three other 
persons were present at the place of occurrence.  
Three other persons namely Shib Pujan Ram, 
Shankar Ram and Daroga Ram (they stand 
acquitted) were carrying pistols and had 
threatened the witnesses, as a result of which 
none of them called out any body to intervene in 
the occurrence. 
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of 
the appellants submits that no specific motive 
has been stated by the father of Sebi Mandal 
which would indicate why the appellants had 
decided to assault or beat up the deceased.  It 
is submitted that there must be some reasons to 
justify the assault.  It is not believable that 
three persons begin to assault a man without 
there being some sort of provocation or motive 
for the said assault.  In this case no motive 
 
 
4 
has been disclosed by the other witnesses as 
well.  Assuming that the Court is to accept the 
argument advanced on behalf of the appellants 
the question that would come up for 
consideration is that some sort of explanation 
ought to have been given by the defence by way 
of suggestion to show that there was a reason 
for false implication.  It appears that both the 
motive and the reason to implicate the 
appellants have not been disclosed by any 
witness.  Therefore, it would be difficult for 
this Court to disbelieve the statement given by 
the witnesses in the Court. 
The second leg of the argument that has 
been advanced on behalf of the appellants is 
that Sebi Mandal was all by himself while he was 
being assaulted by four persons whereas P.W. 1 
is the Mukhiya of the village, Tarni Mandal P.W. 
2, Dinesh Mandal P.W. 3, father of the deceased 
Sarjug Mandal P.W. 4 and Parmanand Mandal P.W. 5 
were present at the place of occurrence.  It has 
been submitted that it is unbelievable and 
unnatural that these four persons along with 
three or four others who have not been examined 
but have been mentioned by witnesses to be 
 
 
5 
present at the place of occurrence did not take 
any steps to stop the appellants from assaulting 
Sebi Mandal.  They did not protest or even shout 
for help.  P.W. 1 Jagdish Mukhiya as his name 
indicates was a Mukhiya at the relevant time and 
it would be presumed that he would be wielding 
some power.  It has been argued that in fact no 
one was present at the time when the occurrence 
took place and it has been falsely claimed by 
the witnesses that they were present at the 
place of occurrence.   
This argument on behalf of the 
appellants would be acceptable to the Court 
except that it is difficult for the Court to 
ignore Ext. 6 i.e. the statement made by the 
deceased.  He was injured person and there is no 
reason that the Court should disbelieve the 
statement made by Sebi Mandal before the police.  
One Hari Prasad Mandal was present at the time 
when the statement of Sebi Mandal was recorded 
by the Daroga.  This Hari Prasad Mandal has not 
been examined although he would be an important 
witness in this case to prove the statements 
made by Sebi Mandal.  The Investigating Officer 
P.W. 7 has proved the statement Ext. 6 which 
 
 
6 
according to the defence is not sufficient to 
convict the appellant.  It is further submitted 
that the Sebi Mandal has given a reason for the 
occurrence.  According to him he was assaulted 
because of village politics which ought to have 
proved by an independent witness. 
In the circumstances all that can be 
said is that statement of Sebi Mandal has to be 
considered along with the other evidence that 
has come on record.  For this purpose I shall 
refer to the injury report. 
P.W. 7 Dr. Rajendra Prasad had examined 
the victim and found following injuries:- 
i. Lacerated wound 1”  x ½”x bone on 
left side of bone. 
ii. Lacerated wound ½”  x S x ¼ ” on 
dorson of left elbow. 
iii. Swelling 3” x 2” on left elbow 
joint. 
iv. Lacerated wound ½” x ¼” x ¼” on 
right knee joint. 
v. Swelling whole of knee joint. 
vi. Lacerated wound ½” x ¼” x ¼” on  
right elbow. 
vii. Swelling whole of right elbow. 
 
 
7 
viii. Buise whole of upper eye lid. 
ix. Lacerated wound ½” x ¼” x ¼” on 
left leg below knee. 
x. Scratch ½” x ¼” on left cheek. 
xi. Lacerated wound ¼” x ¼” x ¼” on 
middle finger of right hand. 
The injuries enumerated above should 
ordinarily not have led to death of a person as 
the injuries are on the elbow, knee, leg, below 
knee, scratches and bruises.  It is not expected 
in the usual course of things that such an 
injury would lead to death of a person and, 
therefore, the Court has rightly convicted the 
appellants under Section 304 Part I.  The main 
aspect of this case is that the injuries do not 
indicate that the appellants in fact had any 
intention to cause the death of Sebi Mandal.  
Not a single injury has been inflicted on the 
vital part of the body.   However, there is no 
doubt about the fact that Sebi Mandal received 
the injuries.  The question that arises is that 
who were the persons who actually inflicted the 
injuries.  Going by the statement made by Sebi 
Mandal, it can be held that the injuries can be 
attributed to the appellants. 
 
 
8 
In the circumstances, this Court holds 
the appellants guilty of offence under Section 
304 part II but in the special facts and 
circumstances enumerated above and also because 
the case is of the year 1986 and considering 
that the appellants have remained in custody for 
almost two years, the sentences are reduced to 
period undergone subject to payment of fine of 
Rs. 2000/- each to be paid to the 
wife/children/father or mother of Sebi Mandal 
within a period of two months after receiving 
notice in this case, in default of which the 
appellant shall undergo R.I. for 2 months. 
The appeals are dismissed with the 
aforesaid modification in the sentence.  The 
appellants are discharged from the liabilities 
of their bail bonds. 
 
 
Patna High Court, 
May 1st, 2009 
N.A.F.R./Sanjay 
                (Sheema Ali Khan, J.) 
 
