Source: AWS Open Data - indian-high-court-judgments/data/pdf/year=1990/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010030261990_1_2012-03-01.pdf
Ref: data/pdf/year=1990/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010030261990_1_2012-03-01.pdf

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA 
 
Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No.3218 of 1990 
=========================================================== 
1. Malik Astur Ali 
2. Abdul Manik @ Manik Ali 
3. Sadikul Islam @ Sadakas Ali, Sons of Nasitullah, All residents of Village 
Azampur Shankar, Tola Ghuski, Police Station Barari, District Katihar  
....   ....    Petitioner/s 
Versus 
1. The State of Bihar through Secretary, Home Department, Govt. of Bihar, Patna 
2. The Commissioner, Home Department, Govt. of Bihar, Patna 
3. The Secretary, Home Dept., Govt. of Bihar, Patna 
4. The Under Secretary, Govt. of Bihar, Patna 
5. Superintendent of Police, District Katihar 
6. Officer Incharge, Barari Police Station, District Katihar 
....   ....  Respondent/s 
=========================================================== 
Appearance : 
For the Petitioner/s   :         Mr.  Rajendra Prasad, Senior Advocate 
                                            Mr. Pramod Kumar, Advocate 
                                            Mr. Ritesh Kumar, Advocate 
       Mr. Pramod Kumar, Advocate 
For the Respondent/s :        Mr. Shashidhar Jha, AC to GA-1 
                      =========================================================== 
CORAM: HONOURABLE JUSTICE SMT. ANJANA PRAKASH 
 
Date: 01-03-2012 
 
   The Petitioners seek quashing of the orders 
contained in letters no.813, 814 and 817 all dated 
14.3.1989 issued by the Under Secretary, Home 
Department, Government of Bihar, Patna ordering them to 
leave India within three days from the service of the order. 
2. The background facts essential for the determination 
of this case are that a First Information Report was 
instituted against the present Petitioners on 25.6.1983 by 
way of a written statement submitted by the Officer 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
2 
Incharge, Barari P.S. u/s.14 of the Foreigners Act. 
3. The allegation in the First Information Report was 
that on a secret information received that some 
Bangladeshis had come near Azampur Shankar Bandh the 
Informant along with other police officials went to the 
place of occurrence to conduct an inquiry and examined 
Panjab Ali and Shaukat Ali of Village Aajpur Ranighat 
and the Mukhiya of Durgapur Panchayat i.e. Manzoor 
Alam and Chaukidar Bhushan Rishi. All these persons 
reportedly told him that Petitioner No. 1 along with two 
girls, namely, Bibi Rahima and Bibi Fatima and the other 
two Petitioners had been living on the Bandh since 4-5 
years. They had heard that these Petitioners had come 
from Bangladesh having fled from there. The Petitioner 
Nos. 1 and 2 reportedly did not produce any passport or 
document authorising their stay in India. It was alleged 
that the Petitioners had committed an offence u/s.14 of the 
Foreigners Act since they were without any passport or 
any document with regard to stay in India. 
4. From the Counter Affidavit filed on behalf of the 
Respondents, it appears that the S.P., Katihar had 
supervised the matter and submitted a report on 29.8.1985. 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
3 
In the Supervision Note the allegations in the First 
Information Report were set out as also the fact that the 
witnesses in the First Information Report had supported 
the same. It contained the version of the informant that in 
course of conducting the inquiry, he had heard small 
children screaming that the Police had come to catch the 
Bangladeshis. The Mohalla Chaukidar and other villagers 
also confirmed that the accused were Bangladeshis. 
Witnesses Panjab Ali, Shaukat Ali and the Mukhiya 
Manzoor Alam further stated that the Petitioners had been 
living in the Village Ghuski Dist Maldah West Bengal 
since 8-10 years and had been living on to the banks of the 
canal for the last one and half years. The S.P. reported th at 
when Petitioner no.3 was questioned, he stated that he had 
been living in India since last 10-15 years, but he did not 
produce any Passport or such document in its regard, 
whereas Petitioner no.1 did not give any satisfactory reply. 
Based on his own observations he concluded that the 
Petitioners had been living in Katihar for the last 1 ½ years 
and in Village Ghuski Dist. Maldah W.B for the last 10-12 
years, on the basis of inputs received from the witnesses.  
He lastly concluded that the Petitioners were Bangladeshis 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
4 
and had been living in India without acquiring its 
citizenship therefore fit to be prosecuted u/s.14 of the 
Foreigners Act. He, however, mentioned a Memo 
No.877(3) of Special Branch dated 17.12.1984 and added 
that the accused persons did not belong to village Ghisbar 
Hazi Tola, P.S. Manikchand, District Maldah as claimed 
but had been living in Village Khusbar, P.S. Manikchand, 
District Maldah. The accused persons stated that their 
father had brought them to Azampur Shankar Bandh 
Katihar and, therefore, nobody knew them in village 
Khusbar, District Maldah.  
5. On 14.3.1989 the Under Secretary, Home 
Department issued a letter purportedly in exercise of 
powers u/s 3(2) (c) Foreigners Act, 1946 and directed the 
Petitioners to leave the Country within three days of 
service of Notice. The Petitioners then moved this Court 
under Writ Jurisdiction when by an interim order dated 
25.7.1990 this Court directed that no coercive steps be 
taken against them. 
6. The Petitioners challenged the Quit notice on the 
ground amongst others, that the order was violative of 
principles of natural Justice as no opportunity of hearing 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
5 
had been afforded to them before the same was passed. 
The Petitioners further sought to substantiate their claims 
that they were Indian Citizens by bringing on record 
various documents in its support. 
7. The Petitioners submitted that they  were brothers 
being sons of late Nasitullah who died in the year 1970-71 
and had been living with their father in village Khasbar 
Tola, P.O. Uttarchandpur, P.S. Manikchak under 
Manikchak Panchayat Samittee in the district of Maldah 
ever since their birth and working there as labourers. In the 
year 1970 petitioner nos.2 and 3 came to live in village 
Aajampur Shanker Tola Ghuski, P.S. Barari, District 
Katihar and settled on the land of Arshad Ali working in 
his farm. Chaukidari receipts were issued in the name of 
Petitioner no.2 and his name found place in the electoral 
roll of Barari constituency within Katihar District of the 
year 1975 and 1980. Petitioner no.3 was minor at that 
point in time. The name of Petitioner No.1, who had 
relocated himself to village Ghuski Tola from Khasbar 
Tola District Maldah, West Bengal also found place in the 
same electoral roll. In the year 1981 certain pieces of land 
were purchased by Petitioner no.2 and also mutated in his 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
6 
name. The Chairman of Manikchak Panchayat Sammittee 
District Maldah issued a certificate on 17.12.1986 that the 
Petitioners had been living within that Panchayat Samitee 
in village Khoswar Tola since 1970. Thereafter the 
Mukhiya of Durgapur Gram Panchayat also issued a 
certificate that the Petitioners were living in village 
Azampur Shankar. The Petitioners argued that apart from 
these, other documents also supported their  plea that they 
had been residing in the area since a long time. It was 
submitted that the Court below had granted bail to them on 
22/23.7.1983 relying on the same. 
8. It is noteworthy that the Respondents in their 
Counter Affidavit have conceded that the substantive case 
was subsequently withdrawn for reasons of State and 
Public Policy and a decision was taken to deport the 
Petitioners U/S.3(2)(C) Foreigners Act, 1946, but the 
affidavit is silent on the compulsions necessitating such a 
decision. Pursuant to the said decision the Under Secretary 
issued the impugned letters and directed the S.P. (Task 
Special Branch, Bihar, Patna) to execute the same. The 
State rejected the documents filed on behalf of the 
Petitioners in the present application on the ground that 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
7 
they were not reliable, and, did not substantiate their 
claims of being Indian citizens. It once again charged the 
Petitioners of being of Bangladesh origin and of residing 
in India without valid documents. 
9. In the present case as noted above, the defence of 
the Petitioners is that their family had migrated from 
Maldah and had relocated themselves at Village Azampur, 
Tola Ghuski, P.S. Barari, District Katihar. 
10. The concept of „Migration‟ had come up for 
consideration before the Supreme Court on importantly 
two occasions in the initial years of the formation of our 
nation when a large chunk of the populace was  still in a 
state of flux owing to its indecisiveness as to which side of 
the boundary line they should opt to live in. 
11. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in 1961 in the case of 
Smt Shanno Devi Vs. Mangal Sain (AIR 1961 SC 58) 
gave a narrow interpretation to the word “migration” 
appearing in Articles 6 and 7 of the Constitution Of India 
but in 1966 a Five judges bench in the case of Kulathi 
Mammu vs. The State of Kerala (AIR 1966 SC 1614) 
overruled the narrow interpretation of Shanno Devi (supra) 
and gave a wider meaning as “coming or going from one 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
8 
place to another whether or not with intention to reside at 
latter place”.  
12. Therefore, the reasonable interpretation given is, a 
change in abode, which is the defence of the present 
Petitioners, but the question is, whether the Petitioner s had 
a right to migrate or movement, because unlike Articles 14 
and 21, Article 19 of the Constitution allows freedom of 
movement only to its qualified citizens .Hence what was 
crucial for determination in the present case was whether 
or, are not, Petitioners were citizens of India. 
13.      However this Court is not the competent forum to 
decide this issue, nor required to do so. Hence without 
evaluating the validity of the claims of the Petitioners it 
will proceed to examine how the relevant authorities had 
tackled the same keeping in mind that Indian laws do not 
mandate possession of any specific document by an Indian 
citizen to prove his citizenship. In an attempt at doing so, 
let us firstly understand the scheme of the Foreigners Act, 
1946. The Act was purportedly introduced to provide for 
the exercise by the Central Government of certain powers 
in respect of the entry of foreigners into India, their 
presence therein and their departure therefrom. Section 2  
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
9 
sub clause 1 (a) defines foreigner “as a person, who is not 
a citizen of India”. Section 3 confers powers on the Govt. 
to issue such orders as specified therein in respect to a 
"foreigner". For sake of convenience the same is 
reproduced hereunder; 
"3. Power to make orders. 
(1) The Central Government may by order make 
provision, either generally or with respect to all 
foreigners
 or with respect to any particular 
foreigner or any prescribed class or description 
of foreigner, for prohibiting, regulating or 
restricting the entry of foreigners
 into 1[ India] 
or, their departure there from or their presence 
or continued presence therein. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing power, orders made 
under this section may provide that the 
foreigner
- 
(a) shall not enter 1[ India] or shall enter 1[ 
India] only at such times and by such route and 
at such port or place and subject to the 
observance of such conditions on arrival as may 
be prescribed; 
(b) shall not depart from 1[ India], or shall 
depart only at such times and by such route and 
from such port or place and subject to the 
observance of such conditions on departure as 
may be prescribed; 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
10 
(c) shall not remain in 1[ India] or in any 
prescribed area therein; [(cc) shall, If he has 
been required by order under this section not to 
remain in India, meet from any resources at his 
disposal the cost of his removal from India and 
of his maintenance therein pending such 
removal;] 
(d) shall remove himself to, and remain in, such 
area in 1[ India] as may be prescribed; 
(e) shall comply with such conditions as may be 
prescribed or specified- 
(i) requiring him to reside in a particular place; 
(ii) imposing any restrictions on his movements; 
(iii) requiring him to furnish such proof of his 
identity and to report such particulars to such 
authority in such manner and at such time and 
place as may be prescribed or specified; 
(iv) requiring him to allow his photograph and 
finger impressions to be taken and to furnish 
specimens of his handwriting and signature to 
such authority and at such time and place as 
may be prescribed or specified 
(v) requiring him to submit himself to such 
medical examination by such authority and at 
such time and place as may be prescribed or 
specified; 
(vi) prohibiting him from association with 
persons of a prescribed or specified description; 
(vii) prohibiting him from engaging in activities 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
11 
of a prescribed or specified description; 
(viii) prohibiting him from using or possessing 
prescribed or specified articles; 
(ix) otherwise regulating his conduct in any such 
particular as may be prescribed or specified; 
(f) shall enter into a bond with or without 
sureties for the due observance of, or as an 
alternative to the enforcement of, any or all 
prescribed or specified restrictions or 
conditions; 
(g) shall be arrested and detained or confined;] 
and may make provision 3[ for any matter which 
is to be or may be prescribed and] for such 
incidental and supplementary matters as may, in 
the opinion of the Central Government, be 
expedient or necessary for giving effect to this 
Act. 
(3) Any authority prescribed in this behalf may 
with respect to any particular foreigner
 make 
orders under clause (e) 2[or clause (f)] of sub- 
section (2).]" 
                                      [Underlining mine] 
14.       Section 14 provides penalty for 5 years for 
violation of visa rules and contravention of the provisions  
of this Act or of any order made thereunder or any 
direction given in pursuance of this Act or such order for 
which no specific punishment is provided under this Act. 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
12 
15.  Significantly Section 9  creates an exception to the 
general law of evidence: 
“9. Burden of proof .-If in any case not falling 
under section 8 any question arises with 
reference to this Act or any order made or 
direction given thereunder, whether any person 
is or is not a foreigner or is or is not a foreigner 
of a particular class or description the onus of 
proving that such person is not a foreigner or is 
not a foreigner of such particular class or 
description, as the case may be, shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), lie upon 
such person.” 
16.    However, the Act in itself is silent as to how this 
burden is to be discharged. In 1964 the Central Govt 
promulgated the Foreigners Tribunal Order in exercise of 
its powers u/s 3 of the Foreigners Act by which a tribunal 
was to conduct an inquiry to determine the question of 
legitimacy of a claim of citizenship, on reference by the  
Central Government. It provides for an elaborate 
procedure giving an opportunity to the person charged to 
prove his claim. The procedure finds mention in the case 
of Sarbananda Sonowal v. Union of India and another 
(AIR 2005 SC 2920) quoted later in this judgement. 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
13 
Notably in the present case the State has not elaborated on 
the decision-making process nor has it taken a stand that 
the Petitioners case was referred to the Tribunal, 
constituted either under the Foreigners (Tribunal) Order, 
1964 or under (The) Illegal Migrants (Determination by 
Tribunals) Act, 1983. It has merely stated in Para 8 of its 
Counter Affidavit as follows: 
“In accordance with the instructions received 
from the Govt. of India in the Ministry of Home 
Affairs from time to time the case pending for trial 
against the above named five persons was ordered 
to be withdrawn in expediency of prosecution for 
reasons of State and public policy and they were 
ordered to be deported from India........... The 
instructions of Government of India, Ministry of 
Home Affairs are crystal clear in this regard. In 
nutshell the spirit of the instruction is that if any 
foreigner including Pakistani or Bangladeshi 
citizen was found to be staying in India without any 
valid documents he should be ultimately deported 
from India and if any case is pending in any Trial 
Court against him such cases should first be 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
14 
withdrawn and the concerned foreigners should 
thereafter be deported from India.”                             
17.      This affidavit unfortunately reveals nothing more 
than the callous manner in which the Authorities decided 
the fate of the Petitioners who were undoubtedly ignorant, 
illiterate, poor and defenceless, locking their lives in files, 
and putting them on the mechanical conveyor belt of 
bureaucracy. In my view, along with the five senses, a ma n 
is born with the expectation of being treated a Person 
during his lifetime. When it is denied, it becomes his right 
which is natural and inalienable. The more mature a 
Political State the more watchful it is of its upkeep and 
keen to accord it respect. However, irrespective of the scale 
of maturity of the State, a refined judicial system uniformly 
ensures the same, in instances of risk. 
18.   Another important point which arises for 
consideration is that the scheme of Section 3(2) of the 
Foreigners Act stipulates action only in circumstances of 
“foreigners”. In such situation, in my opinion, the 
Authorities could not have assumed power, when none 
was conferred, to take a decision to deport just any person 
without deciding the question of his citizenship. The 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
15 
specific proviso in the Act contemplates a conditional, not 
absolute power.  
19.    Under these circumstances when the State itself 
admits that the decision was based on a facile application 
of Govt Circulars, showcasing misplaced power derived 
from them, without taking the least care to determine the 
fundamental issue of citizenship, this Court would be 
inclined to hold that the order purportedly passed under 
Section 3 Foreigners Act on the basis of uncorroborated, 
untested, vague and hearsay allegations contained in the 
First Information Report is completely without 
jurisdiction, non-est in the eye of law and indefensible.   
20.       Since the State appears to have passed the order 
on a presumption, it would be important to clarify that 
Section 9 of the Foreigners Act may shift the burden of 
proof or onus on the accused but it does not destabilize or 
unsettle the fundamental principle of presumption of 
innocence. All that it requires, is, that once charged, the 
onus would be on the Accused to prove his innocence.   
21.    Moreover, the fact in issue, whether the Petitioners 
were Indians or Bangladeshis could  be proved  only 
through a certain mode and as per Section 3 of the Indian 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
16 
Evidence Act which stipulates the follows: 
“Proved” - A fact is said to be proved when, 
after considering the matters before it, the Court 
either believes it to exist, or considers its 
existence so probable that a prudent man ought, 
under the circumstances of the particular case, 
to act upon the supposition that it exists. 
 
22.    Proof according to the Evidence Act is a bundle of 
facts which the Court has to determine to exist and it can 
only be appreciated when the same is brought by a Party 
before it. Needless to say the content of the First 
Information Report or subsequent investigation are not 
evidence and, by itself not capable of proving anything. 
23.    The importance of shifting of burden of proof under 
the Foreigners Act and how and why it works to the 
advantage of a person charged has been explained by the 
Apex Court while hearing lengthy arguments in the case of 
Sarbananda Sonowal vs Union of India and Anr (AIR 
2005 SC 2920) allowing the Public Interest Litigation filed 
for declaring (The) Illegal Migrants (Determination by 
Tribunals) Act, 1983 ultra vires and a consequent 
declaration that the Foreigners Act and Rules be made 
applicable in Assam. I hasten to add that it is on the given 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
17 
presupposition that a Tribunal was constituted to 
determine the question of nationality as provided under 
Section 3 of the Foreigners Act which paragraph 15 
reveals. Para 15 and 17 are extracted below for a better 
understanding: 
"15. The Central Government has made the 
Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 in exercise of powers 
conferred by Section 3 of the Foreigners Act. Clause 2(1) 
of this Order provides that the Central Government may 
by order refer the question as to whether a person is or is 
not a foreigner within the meaning of Foreigners Act, 
1946, to a Tribunal to be constituted for the purpose, for 
its opinion. Clause 3(1) provides that the Tribunal shall 
serve on the person to whom the question relates, a copy 
of the main grounds on which he is alleged to be a 
foreigner and give him a reasonable opportunity of 
making a representation and producing evidence in 
support of his case and after considering such evidence as 
may be produced and after hearing such persons as may 
deserve to be heard, the Tribunal shall submit its opinion 
to the officer or authority specified in this behalf in the 
order of reference. Clause 3(1-A) provides that the 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
18 
Tribunal shall, before giving its opinion on the question 
referred to in sub-paragraph (1-A) of paragraph 2, give 
the person in respect of whom the opinion is sought, a 
reasonable opportunity to represent his case. Clause 4 
provides that the Tribunal shall have the powers of a Civil 
Court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil 
Procedure in respect of summoning and enforcing the 
attendance of any person and examining him on oath, 
requiring the discovery and production of any document 
and issuing commissions for the examination of any 
witness." 
 
"17. There is good and sound reason for placing 
the burden of proof upon the person concerned who 
asserts to be a citizen of a particular country. In order to 
establish one's citizenship, normally he may be required 
to give evidence of (i) his date of birth, (ii) place of birth, 
(iii) name of his parents, (iv) their place of birth and 
citizenship. Sometimes the place of birth of his grand- 
parents may also be relevant like under Section 6-A (1) 
(d) of the Citizenship Act. All these facts would 
necessarily be within the personal knowledge of the 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
19 
person concerned and not of the authorities of the State. 
After he has given evidence on these points, the State 
authorities can verify the facts and can then lead evidence 
in rebuttal, if necessary. If the State authorities dispute 
the claim of citizenship by a person and assert that he is a 
foreigner, it will not only be difficult but almost 
impossible for them to first lead evidence on the aforesaid 
points. This is in accordance with the underlying policy of 
Section 106 of the Evidence Act which says that when any 
fact is especially within the knowledge of any person, the 
burden of proving that fact is upon him." 
24.       There is another point which merits consideration 
on facts. The conclusion arrived at by the Supervising 
Authority is that the Petitioners by a rough estimate had 
been living in Katihar since the last 1-1/12 years and 
before that, were residing in West Bengal for about 10-12 
years. By this calculation the Petitioners had been living 
in India since the last 11-131/2 years which would bring 
the date of their residence to between mid 1969 to 1972.In 
an Affidavit filed on behalf of the Union of India in the 
case of Sarbananda (supra) it was brought to the notice of 
the Apex Court that pursuant to talks between the Indian 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
20 
and Bangladeshi Prime Minister, the Indian Govt. had 
issued a Circular dated 30.9.1972   legitimising the stay of 
Bangladeshis who had crossed over the borders before 
25.2.1971. The relevant portion of the Affidavit is 
extracted below: 
“7. During talks between the Prime Ministers of 
India and Bangladesh in February, 1972, the 
Prime Minister of Bangladesh had assured the 
return of all Bangladesh nationals who had 
taken shelter in India since March 25, 1971. 
Accordingly a circular was issued by the 
Government of India on 30.9.1972 setting out 
guidelines for action to be taken in respect of 
persons who had come to India from 
Bangladesh. According to this circular, those 
Bangladesh nationals who had come to India 
before 25 March 1971 were not to be sent back 
and those who entered India in or after the said 
date were to be repatriated." 
                Under these circumstances, the impugned orders  
are clearly, either in violation of the Government of India 
circular, or without paying due attention to the same. The 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
21 
Authorities were evidently required to conduct a more 
conscientious, systematic inquiry, especially in view of 
their own assessment of the period of Petitioners residence 
in India being very close to the notified date.  
25.     The dimension of the case requires attention from 
yet another internationally recognised standpoint. Article 
14(2) of The International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights spells out the right to presumption of innocence, 
whereas Article 14(3) lays down the minimum 
requirement to be afforded to a criminally charged person. 
Article 14(3)(a)(b)(e) of the International Covenant on 
Civil and Political Rights reads thus: 
“3.(a): To be informed promptly and in detail in 
a language which he understands of the nature 
and cause of the charge against him; 
(b) To have adequate time and facilities for the 
preparation of his defence and to communicate 
with counsel of his own choosing; 
(e) To examine or have examined, the witnesses 
against him and to obtain the attendance and 
examination of witnesses on his behalf under the 
same conditions as witnesses against him.” 
           Thus it confirms and protects the basic human 
rights in the same manner as is already intrinsic in our 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
22 
procedural laws. 
26.       Our own Judicial System has been consistently  
more than careful on applications of such fundamental 
principles of law and therefore in recognition of the same 
in the case of Abdul Sattar Haji Ibrahim Patel, Appellant 
v. State of Gujarat, Respondent [AIR 1965 SC 810], five 
Judges Bench of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court while 
considering the challenge to the correctness and validity of 
the order of the High Court of Gujarat, by which the 
Appellant had been sentenced to one year imprisonment 
u/s.14 of the Foreigners Act, it  remanded the matter to the 
Court below to enable the Appellant to lead further 
evidence in his defence. One of the grievances of the 
Appellant was that he had been prevented from examining 
certain witnesses on his behalf on the point of validity of 
obtaining an Indian Passport for reasons beyond his 
control. 
27.      Paragraph 13 of the said judgment is extracted 
below: 
“(13) It appears that during the course of the 
trial the appellant wanted to prove his case that 
he had obtained an Indian passport in 1954 by 
examining certain witnesses, and in that behalf 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
23 
he filed a list of witnesses on January 21, 1960. 
Amongst these witnesses was witness No.6, clerk 
of the D. F. O. of the assistant Secretary, 
Political and Services Department, and he was 
called upon to produce the original or copy of 
the Indian Passport No. C. O. 41323 dated April 
8, 1954, given to the appellant and all 
applications made by the appellant in regard to 
it. The list contained the names of other 
witnesses also, some of whom were examined. 
Summons to the 6 th witness was sent through the 
Chief Secretary to the Government of Bombay. 
For no fault of the appellant, the witness did not 
turn up and the passport was not produced, and, 
as we have already stated, the other evidence 
adduced by the appellant was not accepted by 
the High Court.”                                                  
 
                In the case at hand since no substantive case  
survives for determination it cannot be remanded and has 
to be dealt with appropriately by this Court. 
28.         Here I also wish to refer to a case that came up 
before the Gauhati High Court challenging the summary 
procedure adopted by the Tribunal constituted under the 
Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act 1983, 
while it was in existence, in the case of Md. Sahid Ali 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
24 
Fakir and others,  v. Union of India and another, [AIR 
1993 Gauhati, page-9] wherein it was held that when the 
State came with the complaint that the accused migrated 
into India in 1973, onus was on the complainant to prove 
the allegation. 
         Paragraph 6 of the said judgment further went on t o 
very aptly describe the trauma  a person would face if  an  
adverse order is passed without due diligence. It is 
extracted below: 
“6. It is needless to point out that when millions 
of people of a particular race/community and of 
mother tongue are citizens of India and 
permanent resident in Assam, persons of that 
race/ community and of mother tongue, who are 
residing permanently are to be taken as citizen 
of India unless contrary is proved. The burden is 
on the State to rebut the presumption by 
adducing cogent evidence and placing 
materials. Determination of such persons as 
foreign national and consequent deportation 
from his permanent residence with the members 
of his family and throwing them to unknown 
destination would naturally entail immense 
suffering. Before adjudging the person 
permanently residing in India (Assam) as 
foreign national, the Tribunal should be 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
25 
cautious, slow, retrospect and should make 
close scrutiny of the materials on records to see 
as to whether the State has been able to 
establish the case against such person with 
cogent, consistent and convincing evidence. 
Summary enquiry by the Tribunal is fraught with 
every possibility of adjudging a citizen as 
foreign national and subjecting him to 
deprivation of his fundamental right guaranteed 
under Article 21 and the right under Article 300 
A of the Constitution, without any authority of 
law. It is unsafe to adjudge a person residing 
permanently in India (Assam) as foreigner on 
the sole testimony of the Enquiry Officer. In the 
instant case, the learned tribunal solely on the 
basis of the hearsay evidence of one witness 
examined on behalf of the State held that the 
Petitioners migrated into India (Assam) in the 
year 1973. It is apparent from the evidence of 
the said witness examined on behalf of the State 
that he came to know that the Petitioners 
migrated in 1973 and settled in Basimari village 
from one Lohit Nath and one Kinaram Nath. But 
none of them has been examined to corroborate 
the hearsay evidence of the sole witness.” 
 
29.       Elaborating further, this Court wishes to mention 
that in line with the philosophy of the International 
Covenants ensuring fairness in procedure in assertion of 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
26 
political rights of a person, our own Constitution 
guarantees the following as a fundamental right : 
“21. Protection of life and personal liberty. - No 
person shall be deprived of his life or personal 
liberty except according to procedure 
established by law.” 
          Unlike Article 19, it provides for protection to any 
person irrespective of his citizenship. And, therefore, even 
if the Authorities had proceeded on the assumption that the 
Petitioners were Bangladeshis they would have to satisfy 
this Court that they had followed the procedure established 
by law. Here, not only has the State failed to bring any 
material to substantiate that it had adhered to the 
procedures laid down in Foreigners Tribunal Order, 1964 
or (The) Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) 
Act, 1983 but,  the  records demonstrate that it had also 
denied the Petitioners the universal basic human right, i.e. 
audi alteram partem. 
          To quote Lord Denning as he had said in Schmidt v. 
Secretary of State for Home Affairs [(1969)2 Ch D 149] - 
 “Where a public officer has power to 
deprive a person of his liberty or his 
property, the general principle is that it has 
not to be done without his being given an 
opportunity of being heard and of making 
representations on his own behalf.” 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
27 
30.     The issue that even administrative orders are 
amenable to challenge on the principle of „Fair -play in 
action‟ is now settled. The concept of "due process of law"  
is not illusory but a substantial human right. Justice 
Bhagwati speaking for himself, Untwalia and Fazal Ali, JJ. 
in the case of Mrs. Maneka Gandhi Versus Union Of India 
And Another [(1978) 1 Supreme Court Cases 248] Para 10 
very succinctly put this concept in place in the following 
manner:  
“The aim of both administrative inquiry as well 
as quasi-judicial inquiry is to arrive at a just 
decision and if a rule of natural justice is 
calculated to secure justice, or to put it 
negatively, to prevent miscarriage of justice, it is 
difficult to see why it should be applicable to 
quasi-judicial inquiry and not to administrative 
inquiry. It must logically apply to both.” 
 
31.      His Lordship traced the history of development of 
this aspect of law both in England and India and thereafter 
concluded: 
“This Cement Companies Ltd. V. P. N. Sharma 
where development in the law had its parallel in 
India in the Associated this Court approvingly 
referred to the decision in Ridge v. Baldwin 
Patna High Court CWJC No.3218 of 1990 dt.01-03-2012 
 
28 
(supra) and, later in State of Orissa v. Dr. 
Binapani Dei observed that: “If there is power 
to decide and determine to the prejudice of a 
person, duty to act judicially is implicit in the 
exercise of such power”. 
 
32.      In view of the aforesaid discussions, this Court 
concludes, that the impugned orders deserve to be set 
aside, not only because they demonstrate blatant 
arbitrariness, are procedurally incompetent but, also, 
because they are an abuse of the trust reposed in a Public 
Servant, in dereliction of his duty, which was, primarily, to 
preserve the life and liberty of a person, whether, or not, 
an Indian. 
33.         Accordingly, this application stands allowed. 
  
    
 
 
Patna High Court 
Dated 1st March, 2012 
Narendra/AFR 
                            ( Anjana Prakash, J. ) 
 
 
