Source: AWS Open Data - indian-high-court-judgments/data/pdf/year=1993/court=24_17/bench=gujarathc/GJHC240149391991_1_1993-12-30.pdf
Ref: data/pdf/year=1993/court=24_17/bench=gujarathc/GJHC240149391991_1_1993-12-30.pdf

 
 
CRIMINAL REVISION APPLN.  NO.  151 of 1991
                         to   274 of 1991
 
CRIMINAL REVISION APPLN.  NO.  276 of 1991
                         to   374 of 1991
 
CRIMINAL REVISION APPLN.  NO.  490 of 1991
                         to   592 of 1991
 
CRIMINAL REVISION APPLN.  NO.  394 of 1991
                    {Total   327 Matters}
 
 
 
 
			    DATE OF DECISION :  30-12-1993
 
 
 
For Approval and Signature :
 
THE HON'BLE MR.  JUSTICE K.J VAIDYA
 
 
 
CHHATRASINH V PARMAR
OCTROI INSPECTOR
VADODARA MU..
 
jAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
V.
ARTI TRANSPORT COMPANY
VADODARA & Ors.
 
 
      
       1.	Whether Reporters of Local Papers may be
       	allowed	to see the judgment ? YES
      
       2.	To be referred to the Reporter or not ? YES
      
       3.	Whether their Lordships wish to see the fair copy
	of the judgment ? NO
      
       4.	Whether this case involves a substantial question
	of law as to the interpretation of the	
               Constitution of India, 1950 or
 
               any other order	made thereunder ? NO
       	
       5.	Whether it is to be circulated to the Criminal
	Courts ? NO
      
 
Mr.  Giriraj N Desai,  the  learned  Senior  Counsel  with  Mr.
Pranav Desai for the Petitioner.
Mr.  D.K Trivedi, learned PP for the Respondent-State
Mr.  B.T Rao, learned Advocate for Respondents in
Criminal Revision Application No.  394 of 1980 only.
In rest of the matters - respondents served.
 
 
				     CORAM :  K.J VAIDYA, J.
						30-12-1993
 
ORAL JUDGEMENT
 
	This  group of 327 Criminal Revision Applications under
Section 397 and 401 of the Criminal Procedure  Code,  1973,  at
the instance  of  the original Complainant - Mr.  Chhatarsinh C
Parmar,  Octroi  Inspector,  Vadodara  Municipal   Corporation,
Vadodara  is  directed  against the impugned judgment and order
dated 7-9-1990, dismissing the complaints under Section 468 (2)
(a) of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 rendered seperately in
as  many  criminal  cases  by  the  learned  J.M.F.C   (Muni.),
Vadodara,  wherein as a result the respondents transport owners
who came to be prosecuted for the alleged contravention of  the
Clause-3  of  Standing  Orders  and  Octroi Rules (as stated in
detail in the complaints framed under Section 466 (1)  (A)  (f)
and  (a)(b)  respectively  read  with  Section  398, 468 of the
Bombay Municipal Corporations Act, 1949), were  ordered  to  be
released.
 
 
1.1	Now since the facts-situation and the law of limitation
regarding taking cognizance of the offence  under  Section  468
(2)  (a),  470  and  473  of the Code arising in group of these
cases being  common;  except  some  variations  in  matters  of
particulars about  the  :    (a)  name  and  addresses  of  the
concerned accused, (b) type of imported goods in question,  (c)
date of importing the said goods, (d) issuance of notice to pay
octroi duty, etc., at the joint request and with the consent of
the  learned advocates appearing for the respective parties, it
has been so decided to hear and dispose of all  these  Criminal
Revision Applications together by this common judgment.
 
2.	In substance, to briefly narrate the broad facts of all
these cases,	according to  Mr.    Chattarsinh  Parmar,  Octroi
Inspector, the respondents herein  are  the  transport  owners,
doing  their  respective  businesses  of  transporting goods in
Vadodara City.  These respondents on given dates, as set-out in
the respective complaints, had imported certain goods in  their
respective vehicles within the limits of the Vadodara Municipal
Corporation, by making palpably false representation before the
concerned  Octroi  Clerk  that  the same were to be immediately
exported from the City limits, and on the basis  of  the  same,
they  obtained  "transit passes" under Clause 3 of the Standing
Orders (made by Baroda Municipal Corporation confirmed  by  the
Government  vide its Resolution dated 12-3-1970) framed u/s.466
(1)(A)(f) of the Bombay Municipal Corporation  Act,  1949  {for
short "B.M.C.   Act"}.    This  Clause 3 of the Orders reads as
under :-
 
 
"(3)	Procedure  to  be followed for exporting the good
       intended for immediate exportation  :-  Any  person  in
       charge  of the goods indended for immediate exportation
       that are being imported into the Octroi limits  of  the
       Municipl  Corporation  will be bound to convey the said
       goods from the Import Naka to the Export Naka under the
       Municipal Supervision in accordance with the conditions
       and in the manner prescribed below :-
 
 
 (i) The said  goods  will  have  to  be  exported
             within  six hours from the time of import or such
             longer period as may be permitted  in  accordance
             with provisions contained herein after.
 
 (ii) The said goods will have to be conveyed from
             the Import Naka to the Export  Naka  without  any
             change  of  hands  (due  to sale or otherwise) or
             form, condition or appearance by any  process  of
             manufacture  or otherwise and without their being
             used Consumed or sold within the octroi limits of
             the Municipal Corporation.
 
 (iii) The person bringing the goods at the Import
             Naka  shall give a declaration and an undertaking
             to the Import Naka Karkun in the form  prescribed
             in   Scheduled  "A",  pay  the  supervision  fees
             prescribed in Schedule "B" and obtain from him  a
             Transit  Pass  in the form prescribed in Schedule
             "C".
 
 (iv)  After  obtaining  the Transit Pass he shall
             proceed to the Export Naka with the said goods in
             the company of the Municipal Escort provided  for
             this purpose by the routes which are specified in
             Schedule "G".
 
 (v)  After arriving at the concerned Export Naka,
             he shall after satisfying himself that the  goods
             brought  to the Export Naka are the same as those
             that are noticed in the  Transit  Pass  and  that
             they   are   brought   in   accordance  with  the
             Conditions prescribed, note the  time  of  export
             and  other  necessary  details  and  certify  the
             export of goods on the Transit Pass.    He  shall
             thereafter  be  bound  to  remove  the said goods
             outside the Octroi limits of the of the Municipal
             Corporation forthwith.  The Transit Pass shall be
             retained  by  the   Export   Naka   Karkun,   and
             certificate  of  the  export of material shall be
             given by the Export Naka Karkun to  the  Importer
             on the tripliciate Transit pass.  "
 
            
Further  according  to  the  petitioner,  since the respondents
herein in contravention of the aforesaid  sub-clause  (iii)  of
Clause-3  of the Orders did not transport the imported goods in
question out of the Octroi limits, they were liable to pay  the
octroi  duty by virtue of Clause-8 of the Orders which reads as
under :-
 
 
"(8) If the goods declared at the time of import to  be
       the  goods  intended  for immediate exportation are not
       conveyed out of the  Octroi  limits  of  the  Municipal
       Corporation  within  the  prescribed  time of six hours
       from the time of import or within the time extended  by
       the  Export  Naka  Karkun  or if the said goods are not
       exported in the  manner  prescribed  in  the  foregoing
       provisions,  the  said  goods shall for all intends and
       purposes  be  deemed  as  goods   imported   for   use,
       consumption  or  sale  within  the Octroi limits of the
       Corporation and
 
 (i)  Octroi  due  thereon shall be recovered from
             the person importing such goods and he shall  pay
             the  amount of octroi within 72 hours of the time
             and date of import.
 
 (ii) If the Octroi is not paid  as  mentioned  in
             standing  order 8 (i) the same shall be recovered
             as if it is a property tax and recovered  in  the
             manner   laid  down  in  Chapter  (viii)  of  the
             Schedule "A" of the Bombay  Provincial  Municipal
             Corporations Act, 1949.
 
 (iii) The Deposit amount if paid as per foregoing
             provisions  shall  be  treated  as octroi and the
             additional octroi if any will be recovered as per
             standing order No. 8 (1) and (2) and  the  person
             from  whom the deposit is received shall alone be
             deemed to be the importer."
 
            
This  procedure  was also not complied with and accordingly the
goods in question ultimately  remained  goods  as  having  been
imported within the municipal limits of Vadodara without paying
any octroi  duty  thereupon.    Now  this unpaid octroi duty is
payable on demand and the procedure prescribed for the same  in
Clause-11 of Vadodara Municipal Corporation Octroi Rules, 1985,
framed  under  Section 457 (7) read with Section 149 (1) of the
B.M.C Act (for short "Octroi Rules") which reads as under :-
 
 
"11.  Octroi payable on demand :-
 
 (a) Octroi shall be payable on demand.
 
 (b) Every person authorised by  the  Commissioner
             to  demand octroi shall tender to every person on
             whom the demand is made  a  bill  specifying  the
             goods taxable, the amount claimed and the rate at
             which the tax is calculated.
 
 Provided that when any consignment is received in
             part  of  parts at different times, the tax shall
             be levied only in respect of such portion  as  is
             actually  imported  from  time to time and not on
             the whole  of  the  consignment  entered  in  the
             invoice.
 
	Now,  the penalty prescribed for breach of the Standing
 
Orders, etc.  etc.  is  provided  in  clause  11  of  the  said
 
Standing Order which reads as under :-
 
 
11. Penalty :- Whoever commits a breach of  any  of  the
                     foregoing   standing  orders  or  whoever
                     supplies   any   false   information   or
                     produces  false  Transport  Pass, Transit
                     Pass  or  a  Deposit  Receipt  shall   be
                     punishable  with fine which may extend to
                     Five Hundred Rupees and in  the  case  of
                     continuing  breach  the offender shall be
                     punishable with fine which may extent  to
                     Twenty  Rupees for every day during which
                     the breach continues after Conviction for
                     the first breach.
                    
 
The  aforesaid  provision  regarding  penalty  appears  to   be
primarily for the purposes of the departmental proceeedings for
recovery   of   octroi  dues  from  the  concerned  defaulters.
Accordingly,  mere  recovery  of  octroi  by  officers  of  the
Corporation  will  not  absolve  concerned  defaulters from the
criminal prosecution, where the penalty provided under  section
398 of the BMC Act reads as under :-
 
 
	Section 398 - Penalty for evasion of Octroi or toll.
 
Where  any  vehicle, animal, or goods imported into the
       limits of the City are liable to the payment of tool or
       octroi any person who, with the intention of defrauding
       the Corporation, causes or abets the introduction of or
       himself introduces or attempts to introduce within  the
       limits  of  the  City any such vehicle, animal or goods
       upon which payment of the toll or octroi  due  on  such
       introduction has neither been made nor tendered, shall,
       on  conviction,  be punished with fine which may extend
       toten times the amount of such toll or octroi or to two
       hundred and fifty rupees, whichever may be greater.
 
	Similarly, Section 399 provides for the general penalty
 
which reads as under :-
 
	Section 399 - General Penalty.
 
Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or  rule,
       by-law, regulation, standing order, licence, permission
       or notice issued thereunder or fails to comply with any
       requisition  lawfully  made  under  any  such provision
       shall, if no penalty is provided in any other provision
       of this Act  for  such  contravention  or  failure,  be
       punished,  for  each  such offence, with fine which may
       extend to one hundred  rupees  and  with  further  fine
       which  may  extend  to  twenty  rupees for every day on
       which such contravention or failure continues after the
       first conviction.
 
On  the  authorities coming to know about the aforesaid default
committed by the respondents, notices were issued against  them
under Rule  16  of the Octroi Rules.  The said Rule 16 reads as
under :-
 
 
	(16) Issue of requisition notices :-
 
 If  th  Commissioner   or   any   other   officer
             authorised  in  this  behalf is of opinion or has
             reason to believe that it  is  necessary  in  the
             interest   of   Municipal   Revenue  to  issue  a
             requisition notice as per Form 'B' or in  such  a
             form  as  may  be  prescribed  by  the  Municipal
             Commissioner, from time to  time  may  issue  the
             same asking any owner or importer of goods or any
             person  connected  with import of goods to return
             it duly filled in and signed  by  him  within  15
             days  from  the  date of receipt of the same. The
             person, who is required by a written notice so to
             do, shall fill in correct details  and  submit  a
             true  account  of  the goods imported by him. The
             Commissioner  or  the  officer   authorised   may
             require  of the said person to produce before him
             any accounts or  documents  and  to  furnish  any
             information  relating  to  the import of goods or
             any other information in connection therewith  as
             may  be  required  together  with  the  copies of
             abstract from such documents, etc. as  appear  to
             him to be necessary. The Octroi duty found due on
             the   information  received  as  per  requisition
             notices or when such information is  believed  to
             be incorrect, or such other authentic information
             as may be obtained, shall immediately, be paid by
             the  said  person  on  demand.  If  the amount so
             demanded is not  paid  on  demand,  it  shall  be
             recovered  as  if  it  were  tax  by  process  of
             recovering as provided in Chaper VIII  (rules  of
             the   Schedule   appended  to  Bombay  Provincial
             Municipal Corporation Act,  LIX of 1949).
Explanation
 
 Recovery  of octroi by an octroi inspector or the
             oficer authorised by the  Municipal  Commissioner
             from  a  person who has evaded should not absolve
             the  latter  from  criminal   prosecution   under
             section  398  of  The Bombay Provincial Municipal
             Corporation Act, 1949.
            
 
Thereafter  even  despite  issuance  of  notices,   since   the
respondents failed to bring their Bills/Invoices, etc, etc., in
question  of the goods imported by them and also having further
failed to  pay  any  octroi  duty,  the  Octroi  Inspector  was
constrained  to  file  complaints  against  all  the  concerned
respondents on 12-2-1988 before the learned J.M.F.C [Muni.]  at
Vadodara for the alleged contravention of the relevant Standing
Orders  3,  8,  12 and Octroi Rule 12 punishable under Sections
468, 398 and 399 of the B.M.C Act etc., etc.
 
3.	On  the  respondents  appearing before the trial Court,
they submitted  an  Application  Exh.      5,   taking-up   the
preliminary  objection  that  since  the  alleged offences were
punishable merely with fine only, the complaints regarding  the
same  ought  to have been filed within stipulated period of six
months as prescribed under Section 468 (2) (a) of the Code, and
since that was not done, there being an  express  bar  to  take
cognizance  of  the offence, all these complaints deserve to be
dismissed and accused be discharged accordingly.
 
3.1	The  aforesaid preliminary objection was opposed by the
Octroi Inspector by filing quite an exhaustive written reply at
Exh.  6, 9, etc.,  etc.,  on  the  various  grounds  as  stated
therein :
 
3.2	The  learned  Magistrate  thereafter after hearing both
the sides while upholding  the  preliminary  objection  on  the
grounds  briefly  set-out  as  under,  ruled "dismissal" of the
complaints as time-barred and accordingly, ordered  release  of
the respondent accused.
 
 
(i) That having regard to the facts  and  circumstances
       of the relevant octroi rules, since punishment provided
       is  only of fine, the complaints were required to filed
       within the stipulated period of six  months  and  since
       the  same  has  not  been  done, the said complaints in
       question cannot be entertained.
 
(ii) That on going through the relevant  provisions  of
       the Act  and  the  Standing Order No.  8 and the Octroi
       Rules, it is not necessary to obtain the sanction.  Not
       only that but  for  filing  the  complaint  it  is  not
       necessary   to   give   notice   under   the  aforesaid
       provisions.  Under the circumstances,  the  time  spent
       for issuing the notice and obtaining sanction cannot be
       excluded  while  computing the period of limitation and
       in that view of  the  matter,  provision  contained  in
       Section 470 (3) is not applicable.
 
(iii)  That  taking  into consideration the cases which
       have been referred to in the said chapter,  the  period
       of  limitation  cannot  be extended by applying Section
       473 of the Code.
 
(iv)  That  the  complainant  had  not  submitted   any
       application  giving explanation for condoning the delay
       and in that view of the  matter  also,  the  period  of
       limitation  cannot  be  extended,  as  asked  for under
       Section 473 of the Code.
 
(v) That the decision of this Court rendered in case of
       State of Gujarat v/s.  Bhavani Industries, 24 (1983) 1,
       G.L.R  p-664  was  not  applicable  to  the  facts  and
       circumstances of the present cases.
 
(vi)  That  the  decision  of  Supreme Court in case of
       State of Punjab v/s.  Swaransingh, 1981 SC p-1054,  the
       same  was  applicable  and  in  that view of the matter
       also, complaints deserves to be dismissed.
 
 
4.	Mr.  G.N Desai, the learned  Senior  Counsel  appearing
for  the  petitioner-Octroi  Inspector,  while  challenging all
these orders dismissing the  complaints,  vehemently  submitted
that  the  same  were  ex-facie  illegal  and  perverse and has
resulted into a serious miscarriage of justice.    Mr.    Desai
further  submitted  that none of the aforesaid grounds on which
the complaints  in  question  came  to  be  dismissed  has  any
reasonable  base  which  can  sustain the close scrutiny at the
hands of this Court.  Making good this submission, Mr.    Desai
has   in   the  first  instance,  submitted  that  taking  into
consideration (i) the date of issuance of the demand notice for
octroi under Rule-12 and  the  date  on  which  the  complaints
actually  came  to  be filed before the learned Magistrate, the
same were within the prescribed time-limit of six months.   Mr.
Desai further urged that in case if this Court was not inclined
to  accept his above submission then in the alternative, in the
second instance, the evasion of octroi duty must be held to  be
a  'continuing  offence'  and  in  that  view of the matter, by
virtue of Section 472 of the Code, fresh period  of  limitation
begins  to run at every moment of time during which the offence
continues, and therefore, all the complaints were filed  within
the statutory  time-bound  !!    and  in  the  third  instance,
according to Mr.  Desai, taking  into  consideration  the  fact
that  the  octroi  evasion  is a white collar economic offence,
which day-in and day-out is  being  committed,  defrauding  and
robbing  the  Municipal  Corporation  of  its  precious  public
revenue, even if the complaints in question were  filed  beyond
the  prescribed  period of limitation, then even in the overall
interests of justice, the  Court  must  extend  the  period  of
limitation  and thereby take cognizance of the alleged offence.
On the basis of these submissions, it was finally urged by  Mr.
Desai  that  since the impugned judgments and orders on face of
it were illegal and perverse, the same at once  deserve  to  be
quashed  and  set-aside  remanding all these cases to the trial
Curt with a direction to restore the same on record and  decide
the same on merits according to law.
 
 
5.	As against  the  above,  Mr.    B.T  Rao,  the  learned
advocate appearing for the respondent vehemently submitted that
the reasons given by the learned  Magistrate  in  his  impugned
judgments  and orders while dismissing the complaints are just,
legal and proper and therefore the same do  not  call  for  any
intereference at the  hands  of  this  Court.  Mr.  Rao further
submitted that the condonation of delay is  a  matter  and  the
circumstance  which  needs  seperate  special application to be
made to the trial  Court  and  that  only  on  making  out  the
'sufficient  grounds'  for  the same that the delay in question
can be condoned.  In the instant cases, according to Mr.    Rao
since the complainant was himself utterly careless and indolent
in  making  the  delay  condonation  application,  there was no
question of condoning the delay in question arises !  Mr.   Rao
further  submitted  that  the  evasion of octroi duty cannot be
said  to  be  'a  continuing  offence'  by   any   stretch   of
imagination.  In  support  of  this  contention,  Mr.   Rao has
relied upon the decision of this Court rendred in case  of  M.S
Upadhyay Upadhyay  v.  Mistri Jayantilal Hargovinddas, reported
in 1985 G.L.H 860.  Further, according to Mr.  Rao  non-payment
of  octroi  duty  cannot be labelled as such a serious economic
offence which can constrain any Court to call  in  aid  Section
473  of  the Code, to extend the period of limitation, in order
to take cognizance of the alleged offence even if it is  beyond
the prescribed period   of   limitation.    Mr.    Rao  further
submitted that to condone delays in such type  of  cases  would
indirectly  encourage  the remissness, indolence on the part of
the  public  servants  in  discharge  of   their   duties   and
accordingly  therefore,  to avoid bad precedent and even to set
them right and make them efficient - by way of an object lesson
the delay should not be condoned.  Mr.  Rao  further  submitted
that  if  this  Court  was  not inclined to accept the decision
rendered in  case  of  M.S  Upadhyay  v.    Mistry   Jayantilal
Hargovinddas  {Supra}  then  in  that  case,  these  matters be
referred to the larger bench to settle once  and  for  all  the
controversy  raging around this point of 'continuing offence' !
Mr.  Rao further submtited  that  if  such  matters  are  taken
lightly,  it  may  unnecessarily  give  an unjust handle to the
public bodies like  Vadodara  Municipal  Corporation,  to  file
complaints   leizurely   at   any   point  of  time  which  may
unnecessarily result into  unjust  harrassment  to  the  honest
citizen !!    In this view of the matter, merely because it has
been alleged that the offence of evading the octroi duty is  an
economic  offence  that  by  itself is not sufficient ground to
take a stern and stringent view of the matter  to  enhance  the
period  of  limitation by resorting to Section 473 of the Code.
Mr.  Rao further submitted that  qua  each  respondents,  Civil
Suits  infact  have  been filed for recovery of the Octroi duty
and  in  that  view  of  the  matter   also,   these   criminal
prosecutions,  more  particularly  when  they  are belated one,
should not be entertained.  Mr.  Rao  on  the  basis  of  these
submissions  finally  urged  that since no case was made out to
interfere with the impugned judgments  and  orders,  all  these
revision applications deserve to be dismissed.
 
6.	Now  having  heard  the learned advocates appearing for
the respective parties quite at length, at the very outset,  it
must be  stated  that  the  submissions made by Mr.  Desai have
indeed considerable force, and accordingly therefore, the  same
merits to  be  accepted  straighway.  In fact on taking a close
look at the chart (submitted by Mr.  Desai) of  327  complaints
filed  against  the  respondents wherein case-wise details with
regard to (i) date of offence, (ii) date of issuance of transit
pass/es, (iii) issuance of notice under Rule-12 of  the  Octroi
Rules,  (iv) date of complaints, etc., wherein things have been
specifically particularized there is indeed  no  difficulty  in
holding   that   all  the  complaints  were  filed  within  the
prescribed period of limitation.  From the said  chart,  taking
into  consideration  the date on which the demand notices under
Rule-12 were  issued  and  thereafter  when  despite  the  said
notices  since  neither  the certificate of export of the goods
nor the octroi duty  came  to  be  deposited  with  authorities
during  the  stipulated  notice period that it can be said with
certainty that the  offences  of  not  depositing  the  transit
passes  and  the non-payment of octroi in question, obtained on
the basis of the false representation had taken  place  !    To
understand this, if  we  look at Sr.  No.  1 of the Chart which
pertains to Criminal Case No.  916 of 1988  out  of  which  the
present Criminal  Revision Application No.  151 of 1991 arises,
the transit pass was issued on 1-5-1987 and ultimately pursuant
to this, since the said Transit Pass  were  not  deposited,  on
coming  to  know about this fact of the case, the demand notice
was issued against the respondent on 11-11-1987.  It  was  only
when   accused   did  not  comply  with  the  said  notice  and
accordingly failed to pay the octroi duty due in question  that
the  offence in respect of the same came into light without any
doubt whatsoever.  Similarly, in other cases also, the date  of
offence  would  be not the date on which goods were imported on
making false representation but it would be the date  on  which
actually  the  octroi  was demanded by issuing the notices, and
yet not deposited with !!  Had indeed these  goods  would  have
been  brought  within the Municipal Corporation limits, without
false representation of exporting it  only,  than  perhaps  the
alleged  offence  of non-payment of octroi duty could certainly
be said to have been committed on the date of its import.   But
then precisely  that  is  not the case here !!  In this view of
the matter, the learned Magistrate was not right when he took a
view that since neither the notice under Rule-12 of the  Octroi
Rules   nor  the  sanction  to  prosecute  was  necessary,  the
commencement of the period of limitation starts from  the  date
on which   goods   came  to  be  imported.    Now  taking  into
consideration the pressure of work which surrounds  the  Octroi
Department   of  the  Municipal  Corporation  viz.,  continuous
issuance of innumberable receipts, preparing challans,  transit
passes,  forwarding  the same to the superior officers and then
ultimately sending it to the Central Office, the  possibilities
of such papers being either misplaced or lost in transit or for
whatever   other  reasons  not  reaching  the  decision  taking
authority in  time,  cannot  be   ruled   out.      Under   the
circumstances,  to  straighway  rush to file complaints on mere
apprehensions without exactly ascertaining the  true  facts  in
the first place as to whether the transit passes were deposited
or not and in the second place, if not deposited whether octroi
due has been paid or not would indeed be quite rash, premature,
harsh and unjust to the concerned transport-owners and the same
indeed  does  not  befit  the  statutory  corporation  like the
Municipal Corporation !!    Precisely,  bearing  in  mind  this
particular aspect, by issuing notices demanding the octroi, the
decision  taking authority can ascertain with certainty whether
the Transit pass/es are deposited and the certificate of export
of goods obtained and if not, the octroi has been paid  or  not
!!   Because in case if the transit passes are deposited and in
case if not deposited and the octroi is duly  paid-up  then  on
the receipt of such notices, the respondents would surely reply
accordingly,  proving  their innocence by producing documentary
proof thereof from their record to avoid the prosecution !   In
this  view  of  the  matter,  issuance  of notice is absolutely
necessary in first  hand  to  determine  whether  in  fact  the
alleged  offences  in  respect of non-payment of octroi and not
depositing the transit passes have taken  place  or  not.    No
complaint in the Court of Law can ever be filed on the basis of
some hunches, apprehensions and inferences without ascertaining
the  true facts regarding the commission of the alleged offence
!  One must clearly understand the  basic  line  of  difference
between  some  hunches,  general apprehensions and the definite
allegations on the basis of which any complaint can lawfully be
filed by statutory corporations in cases like the  present  one
!!
 
6.1	Similarly, the learned  Magistrate  was  not  right  in
saying  that there is no need to obtain the sanction for filing
the complaints.  It is indeed a matter of common knowledge that
the Municipal Corporation is a Statutory body, it has  its  own
rules of  business.   Thus, no person of his/her own sweet will
can ever initiate any proceedings, prosecution on behalf of the
Municipal Corporation against any  citizens  before  any  Court
unless  of  course,  it  is  duly  and  properly sanctioned and
accordingly so authorised.  In this view of  the  matter,  even
after  the  detection of the alleged default, before filing the
complaints, it is incumbent upon the  Octroi  Inspector,  under
the  relevant  provisions  of  the  rules and law to obtain the
necessary sanction to  prosecute  and  this  process  obviously
consumes quite  some  time  !!  If these two glaring aspects as
highlighted abovein para 6 & 6.1 are just borne in mind then in
view of section 473 of the Code, the facts and circumstances in
which delay (if any and at all) took place stands  sufficiently
self-explained to take the cognizance of the alleged offences !
In  this  view  of the matter, since the learned Magistrate was
ex-facie wrong in appreciating the legal position, the impugned
order dismissing the complaints on the said grounds falls flat.
 
7.	Further for  the  sake  of  argument,  even  if  it  be
accepted  that there was some delay in filing the complaints in
respect of the alleged offences, then even, there is  no  doubt
whatsoever  that the evasion of octroi duty being a "continuing
offence", as provided in Section 472 of the Code, fresh  period
of  limitation  would  begin at every moment of the time during
which the offence continues.  The offence  of  not  paying  the
octroi duty and not depositing the transit pass, in the opinion
of  this  Court  is  a "continuing offence" because the date on
which the goods were imported in fact from that date the octroi
becomes due and from that date the Corporation is  entitled  to
recover  the  interest  on  it  and as long as the same goes on
accruing and ultimately unpaid-up, the offence continues.    At
this stage,  the  submission  of  Mr.   Rao that in view of the
decision reported in case of M.S Upadhyay (supra), the  offence
in  question  cannot  be  said  to be continuing offence has no
substance.  Here also it may be pointed out that there  appears
to be  some  error  on the part of Mr.  Rao in reading the said
judgment because the said judgment also does say in para-4,  to
quote, ".....    Now,  if  non-payment  of  octroi  was made an
offence, then certainly we can say that the  offence  continues
till  the  octroi  is  paid  and that way the offence will be a
continuing offence, but Section 192-A (Gujarat Panchayats  Act,
1961)  penalize  the  introduction of goods which are liable to
the payment of octroi within the octroi limits upon  which  the
payment  of  octroi  due  on such introduction has neither been
made nor  tendered.    What  is  made  punishable  is  not  the
non-payment  of  octroi but introduction of goods or animals on
which octroi duty though payable is not paid is an offence  and
that  offence  is  complete as soon as the goods or animals are
introduced within the octroi limits....." Reading this part  of
judgment  with the relevant octroi rules clearly indicates that
what  was  alleged  against  the  respondents-accused  was  non
payment of  octroi  and  not  the import of goods.  Further the
word "Octroi" is defined in Section 2 (c) of the B.M.C Act,  it
means  a  Cess  on the entry of goods into the limits of a city
for consumption, use, or sale therein.   The  reason  is  goods
were  not contraband goods which constituted some offence under
some Municipal Act or Rules.  Everybody is free to import goods
provided he is prepared to pay the Octroi duty.  In  this  view
of  the  matter  since  the  facts in case of the M.S Upadhyaya
(Supra) are not similar, the same cannot be  accepted.    Apart
this,  assuming even for the sake of argument that the decision
rendered in case of M.S Upadhyay (Supra)  was  applicable  with
all  force  to  the facts of the present group of matters, then
even, it is not necessary to refer to the point to  the  larger
bench as  requested  by Mr.  Rao, as keeping aside the question
whether the alleged offences are continuing offence or not, all
these matters can be and  accordingly  has  been  alternatively
allowed on many other points discussed in this judgment.
 
8.	Whether evasion of Octroi duty is an Economic Offence ?
It is of course true that the evasion of the octroi duty is not
included  within  the  embrace   of   the   Economic   Offences
(In-applicability of the Limitation) Act, 1974, which came into
force  in  April,  1974, wherein under Section 2, a schedule is
prescribed wherein as many as 20 offences have been  catalogued
as  'economic  offences'  and the evasion of the Octroi duty is
not so named as economic offence within the list of  the  sasid
economic offence.    But then this list of 20 economic offences
appended to Section 2 of the said Act  is  merely  illustrative
and  cannot  read  as to take in its sweep those offences which
though specifically not named  as  'economic  offence'  yet  in
nature and character of facts constituting the said offence, as
an economic offence.  But merely because somehow the evasion of
the  Octroi  duty  is left out from being mentioned in the said
schedule, that by itself never makes it lose its  character  as
an 'economic  offence' !  In fact, any offence which ultimately
affects the public-revenue  to  the  prejudice  of  the  public
exchequer,  it  is  an  'economic offence' and once the same is
viewed in the said light, the public interest and justice  both
warrant  that  offences  involving  the  evasion of octroi duty
should be governed by Section 473 of the Code  to  be  extended
the  period  of  limitation  in  cases the complaints are filed
beyond the period of limitation !
 
9.	Further still,  it  appears  that  while  deciding  the
present  group  of  Criminal Complaints, the learned Magistrate
with due respect  has  clearly  overlooked  three  commonsense,
tale-telling,  self-evident  circumstances  emerging  from  the
facts alleged in the complaint itself viz., firstly,  that  the
evasion  of  octroi is a white collar chronic economic offence,
as it defrauds  and  robs  the  Municipal  Corporation  of  its
precious  public  revenue  which  is  utterly indispensable and
necessary in the first place to provide and maintain the  civic
amenities  for  the people, in the second place to run the huge
administration as a whole of the Municipal Corporation  and  in
third  place,  no  Municipality and Panchayat is free from this
chronic economic disease of avoiding payment of  octroi  duties
by some  persons.   Accordingly, the leaned Magsitrate ought to
have appreciated as to how  indeed  without  sufficient  funds,
revenue  of  which octroi duty forms major chunk/portion and on
the basis of which the Municipal Corporation  was  expected  to
run  its  aforesaid  show,  that  is  to  say  if  not  closed,
efficiently !    For  example,  to  illustrate,  the  Municipal
Corporation  as  a  statutory  public welfare body always bears
very many heavy responsibility and duties towards the public in
providing essential community services like; (i)  water-supply,
(ii)  Bus-services,  (iii)  fire-brigade, (iv) public roads and
streets, (v) lighting of roads and streets, (vi) public privies
and urinals, (vii) scavenging and cleaning,  (viii)  gardens  &
Zoo  (ix)  schools,  (x)  drains  and  drainage and disposal of
sewage, (xi) disposal of carcass and animals,  (xii)  cremation
grounds,  (xiii) health, sanitation and hospitals, (xiv) Sports
stadium and  town  halls  for  cultural  activities,  and  (xv)
maintenance  and  regulation  of  Markets and slaughter houses,
etc., etc.  All these services  and  activities  undertaken  by
Municipal Corporations invariably calls for huge monetary funds
to  start with and then recurring expenses to maintain them and
further to top this, to  continuously  maintain  the  staff  in
thousands  to  look  after  the  said  essential  services  and
activities of Corporation and also to pay pension  and  service
benefits when  they  retire  from  their services !!  All these
needs, means money, nothing else and less than  money  and  its
uninterrupted regular   inflow   !     In  fact  the  Municipal
Corporation by itself is as  if  a  mini-State  administration.
Thus  the  evasion  of  the  octroi duty by no standards can be
viewed in isolation as a light, excusable default, howsoever  a
smaller be  the amount of evasion there be !  Just like a small
hole in the  bottom  of  ship  cannot  be  ignored  as  it  can
certainly  bring  about  the  disasterous  end by sinking it if
taken lightly !!  Similarly, the gravity and seriousness of the
alleged offence on non-payment of octroi duty  can  not  to  be
viewed and measured merely and only from the angle of amount of
octroi duty  involved  and  the penalty prescribed for it.  For
example, in the instant cases,  for  the  alleged  offences  of
evasion  of octroi duty what is provided is only some rupees of
fine, but then what is required to be further seen is  that  if
the  offence  is  of  the  type which is of the nature of daily
occurrence by number of defaulters and unabatedly going on  and
on  with  ingenious  schemes  and  designs  to avoid payment of
octroi dues if it is not strictly dealt with, what would be its
resultant ultimate impact upon  the  public  exchequer  of  the
Corporation is indeed not difficult to imagine !  In fact, as a
result  of such wide spread and alarmingly increasing offences,
if payment of Octroi is ultimately avoided then  in  that  case
either  the quality and quantity of the public services will be
denied, dwindled or minimized to the greatest  disadvantage  of
citizens  and/or  the Corporation may not have sufficient funds
to regularly pay its staff every month !!    That  in  a  given
case,  Octroi amount may be quite small but at the sametime, it
is a matter of every one's common knowledge that it is drip  by
drip  and  rupee  by  rupee that the exchequer of the Municipal
Corporation  is  gradually  filled  up  which   ultimately   is
channelized  to  supply  money  for  the  payment  of salaries,
maintenance of the city, public welfare activities  etc.,  etc.
Can this  aspect be ever ignored ?  Does it even require in the
first instance, to be  pleaded  by  the  Municipal  Corporation
befaced  with  question  of  defending  period of limitation in
filing the Complaint (?) and in the  second  instance,  whether
the  same  is  to  be  streamlined  and highlighted by it while
praying for endoning delay in  filing  the  complaint  ??    Of
course,  "NO"  as how indeed any Court can ever be so myopic in
vision, wooden, insensitive and lacking in commonsense  to  the
basic  reasonableness and perceptibility of the facts situation
to take the judicial notice of the same ?   And  in  the  third
instance,  apart above, it is indeed indisputable that Vadodara
is one of the biggest and busiest city not only of the State of
Gujarat but also of the Country with hundreds and thousands  of
vehicles  day-in and day-out commuting across the city from all
directions, importing and  exporting  goods  in  thousands  and
millions  of  tones,  involving  lacs  and  crores of rupees of
octroi  duty,  through  number  of  Toll  Nakas  of  the  City,
constraining  the  Municipal  Corporation  to  engage number of
Octroi Clerks attached to the  work  !!    Not  only  that  but
numbers of receipt-books, transit passes and some corresponding
entries in registers are also required to be made and regularly
maintained !    This  entire  administrative process exerts and
involves heavy pressure of  work  and  thick  and  innumberable
bunches of papers from so many Octroi Nakas has to pass through
various  tables/stages  the  formidable bottle necks to verify,
check and detect if something wrong was  committed  during  the
process.  This obviously takes considerable time at every table
and sometimes in a given case it also gathers dust (!!) because
the  agency involved to do all these work is human agency quite
impersonal and at a time quite slow also  and  accordingly,  by
the time, it reaches ultimate decision taking authority, it was
bound  to  cross-across  the stipulated period of limitation !!
All these papers ultimately  are  forwarded  to  the  Municipal
Authorities  sitting in the Central Office to carefully examine
and detect the frauds if any of the non-payment of  the  octroi
duty.   This  is  indeed  a  very  hard,  difficult  and  quite
cumbersome and time consuming process and thereby a  stupendous
task  wherein by the time any decision is taken by the decision
taking authorities, it is bound to  quite  consume  some  time,
sometimes even  more  time also !  In fact, the facts discussed
and highlighted above are as glaring and clear as  Sun  in  the
sky and the light and heat it radiates and throws all-around us
for  any  one  to  feel  its  heat, light and presence thereby,
unless  of  course  one  is  unconscious,  dead  and  gone   !!
Therefore,  for  any court to understand this, it needs neither
any application for the condotion of delay nor any evidence  to
be  lead  in  support  for  that purpose to explain and thereby
ultimately satisfy the concerned Court regarding the facts  and
circumstances  under  which  the delay in question came to take
place.  It is only when the Court unwarrantedly assumes a  role
of  innocent  frog in the well, that it requires to be informed
!!  In this view of the matter, irrespective of  the  attending
facts  and  circumstances of that particular case, it is indeed
down right - wrong first to insist for an application for delay
condonation setting out the facts and circumstances leading  to
the alleged  delay,  if  any.    Evidence is indeed a need only
whenever the Court is in dark and doubt to  decide  any  point,
but  when  the  attending facts situation and circumstances are
more or less gallore, self-eloquent and self-evident  of  which
undoubtedly the judicial notice can be taken and must be taken,
there  is  indeed  no  need  for any such application for delay
condonation.  Ordinarily, procedure is - a device a  bridge,  a
step  which  is  necessary  where  the gap is wide-enough which
without there being any bridge or the step in  between,  it  is
indeed  too difficult to cross across and setp-over to have the
correct assessment of the fact on the  otherside  !!    But  as
against  this,  when  in  between  the  gap/delay  in question,
applying the test of the right minded  person  or  the  man  of
ordinary  prudence,  attending facts-situation and commonsence,
is day light clear there  is  indeed  no  necessity  upon  some
written mechnical  application to plead and prove the same.  In
this view of the matter, it is simply strange as to how  indeed
the learned Magistrate failed to appreciate this simple fact in
the  first  instance  that  the  cases involving evasion of the
octroi duty and that too on such a large scale  at  a  time  by
number of transport-owners can by any strecth of imagination be
said  to  be  trivial, insignificant offences and in the second
instance, looking to the colossal workload at every Octroi Naka
and Central Office, how it can  be  said  that  there  was  any
unreasonable  delay  in  filing the complaint in case if at all
there was any delay in filing the same, which can be  summarily
dismissed on  the  alleged ground of limitation !!  Nodoubt, it
is quite true that taking into consideration merely myopic  one
sided  view  of  the  picture  of  the case viz., (i) the facts
alleged in the complaint, (ii)  the  alleged  contravention  of
relevant  octroi  rules  and Standing Orders, (iii) the penalty
prescribed for the same being only fine, and (iv) the  relevant
provision  contained in Section 468 (2) (a) of the Code, to any
casual onlooker, the same may tempt to give benefit of  bar  of
limitation thereunder  to  the accused.  But this disenchanted,
unconcerned attitude is not the way in which degree and  extent
of its reach on the public interest and in fact, when any Court
is  called upon to decide the question of limitation, it cannot
afford to be unconcerned viewer firstly, ignoring  the  gravity
and  seriousness  of  offence  and the degree and extent of its
reach on the  public  interest,  in  the  instant  case  public
revenue and secondly, looking at few words, ripples, bubbles on
the  water  (procedural)  surface  of Sea (Law) as it must also
attempt  to  guage  and  find  out  the  depth  of   water   !!
Accordingly,  it  cannot  afford  to  be  oblivious  to the two
important aspects involved in the  point  viz.,  in  the  first
instance,  the  gravity  and seriousness of the offence, in the
instant cases the evasion of octroi duty which  is  practically
irreversible,  uncontrollable  relapsing  criminal  tendency, a
chronic virus eating away the vitals of the public  finance  of
the  Municipality and it continues on large or small scale till
the Octroi Rules continue  !!    If  this  die-hard,  obnoxious
on-going  habit  of  octroi-theft  is taken casually, that only
means  that  the  learned  Magistrate  has  lost  the  judicial
perceptibility  and in the second instance, provision contained
in Section 473 of the  Code  which  calls  upon  the  Court  to
condone  delay  and  extend  the  period  of limitation to take
cognizance of the offence in public interest !!
 
9.	That takes  us  to  the  ground  No.    4  on which the
complainant came to be dismissed.  On going  through  the  said
judgment of  State  of  Gujarat v.  Bhavani Industries (supra),
the learned Magistrate has committed patent and  obvious  error
in  holding  that  the same was not applicable to the facts and
circumstances of the present cases.
 
 
10.	Turning to yet another ground viz., the  Supreme  Court
decision rendered  in  case  of State of Punjab v.  Swaransingh
(Supra) on the basis of which, the learned Magistrate dismissed
the complaints, it may  be  stated  that  the  same  having  no
bearing  on  the facts of the present case, is of no assistance
to the respondents-accused.    In  fact  there  cannot  be  any
dispute as regards ratio laid down in the said decision, in the
facts and  circumstances  of  that  case.    Unfortunately, the
learned Magistrate was unable  to  distinguish  the  difference
between the two sets of facts-situation of the alleged offences
in cases  at hand and one in case before the Supreme Court.  In
that case offence was under Section 406 only and not  one  that
of  not  paying  the  octroi  dues which is a serious recurring
economic offence for which tdhe Legislature has taken  care  by
providing  Section 472, 473 of the Code where it is stated that
in  case  of  the  'continuing  offence'  a  fresh  period   of
limitation  shall  begin  to  run  at  every moment of the time
during which offence continues and that in a given case, in the
interest of justice can be extended !  Not only  that  but  the
facts  and  circumstances  of  the  S.C  were  too simple where
Section 473 of the Code can have hardly any say to  extend  the
period  of  limitation  unlike the present group of cases where
Section 473 of Code is immediately applicable !
 
11.	Apart aforesaid discussion, on carefully examining  the
complaints  in  all  these matters, it is indeed significant to
note that they appear to have been filed only for  the  alleged
default  of  not  returning the Transit pass/es as warranted by
Clause 3 of the Standing Order and in turn accordingly also for
not paying up the  octroi  dues  under  the  relevant  standing
orders  and  the  octroi  rules  which are punishable under the
Vadodara  Muncipal   Corporation   Act,   blissfully   ignoring
altogether  that  the very same facts and circumstances alleged
in  all  these  complaints  also  simultaneously  prima   facie
constitutes  offence  punishable  under Sections 175, 176, 177,
199, 200, 403, 406, 415 and 420 of the Indian Penal Code.
 
 
11.1	Section 175 of the I.  P Code pertains to intentionally
omitting to produce a document to a public servant by a  person
legally  bound  to  produce or deliver such document, for which
the sentence provided is simple imprisonment of  one  month  or
fine of Rs.      500/-  or  both.    Section  176  pertains  to
intentionally omitting to  give  notice  or  information  to  a
public servant by a person legally bound to give such notice or
information,  for  which  the  punishment  provided  is  simple
imprisonment for one month or fine  of  Rs.    500/-  or  both.
Section  177 pertains to knowingly furnishing false information
to a public servant,  for  which  the  punishment  provided  is
imprisonment for a period of six months or fine of Rs.  1,000/=
or both.    Section 199 pertains to false statement made in any
declaration which is by law  receivable  as  evidence  and  for
which  punishment  provided is imprisonment for seven years and
fine.  Section 403 pertains to  dishonest  misappropriation  of
the property, for which the punishment provided in Sec.  406 is
imprisonment  for  a term which may extend to two years or with
fine, or with both.  Section 406  pertains  to  punishment  for
criminal  breach of trust, for which the punishment provided is
imprisonment for a term which may extend  to  three  years,  or
with fine,  or  with  both.    Section  415 and 420 pertains to
cheating and thereby dishonestly inducing delivery of property,
or making alteration or destruction of a valuable security  and
for which sentence provided is imprisonment for seven years and
fine.   Thus  taking  into consideration the aforesaid offences
under the Indian Penal Code and the punishment provided for the
same, the period of limitation would not be restricted  to  six
months  only  as provided under Section 468 (2) (a) of the Code
but the same would fall within the ambit of Section 468 (2) (b)
and 468 (2) (c) of the Code having more period  of  limitation.
This  is  quite  clear moment we look at the Section 468, which
reads as under :-
 
 
 
Section 468 - Bar  to  taking cognizance after lapse of
                     the period of limitation.
 
(1) Except as otherwise provided  elsewhere  in  this
             Code,  no  court  shall  take  cognizance  of  an
             offence of the category specified in  sub-section
             (2),   after   the   expiry   of  the  period  of
             limitation.
(2)	The period of limitation shall be -
 
 (a) six months, if the offence is  punishable
                     with fine only;
 
 (b) one  year,  if  the offence is punishable
                     with  imprisonment   for   a   term   not
                     exceeding one year;
 
 (c) three years, if the offence is punishable
                     with  imprisonment  for  a term exceeding
                     one year but not exceeding three years.
 
(3) For the purpose of this Section,  the  period  of
             limitation,  in relation to offences which may be
             tried  together,   shall   be   determined   with
             reference to the offence which is punishable with
             the  more  severe  punishment or, as the case may
             be, the most severe punishment.
 
When all these cases are examined from  this  stand  point  the
same  being  offenes  under  the  I.P Code as well, there is no
question of limitation that arises in the present cases, as all
cases are filed  within  the  prescribed  statutory  period  of
limitation.    It  is  unfortunate  that  the  complainant  has
lost-sight  of   this   aspect   of   the   cases   where   the
respondent-accused  are  liable to be prima facie tried for the
alleged offences under the I.P.  Code.  The learned  Magistrate
in  this  view  of  the  matter is directed to suitably add the
alleged offences under the I.P.  Code after  hearing  both  the
sides.
11.2	Apart this case, in other such cases also, even if  the
complainant for whatever reason has failed to pray the Court to
punish  the accused for the alleged offences under the relevant
sections of IPC, nonetheless  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  the
concerned  learned  Magistrate  of  his own to see the relevant
offences under the IPC are added and accordingly the accused is
punished if the offence is brought home.
 
12.	Now turning to the next argument of Mr.  Rao that  some
suits  are  filed  against  the  present  respondents  for  the
recovery of the octroi duty,  regarding  which  the  complaints
have  been filed and are pointed out to be time-barred, that by
itself is hardly a ground to discard the  criminal  prosecution
as  criminal complaints stand entirely on different and its own
footings on the basis of contravention  of  rules  constituting
Criminal offences  as  stated above.  When that is permissible,
the complaint can be filed and merley because the said suit  is
filed  that  cannot debar the complaintant to file the criminal
complaints against the respondent-accused  before  the  learned
Magistrate.
 
12.1	In view of  the  aforesaid  discussion,  in  the  first
place,  it  is  indeed very clear that all complaints are filed
within the stipulated  period  of  limitation  of  six  months.
Apart  this,  remotely  even, in case if this Court was to hold
that there was some delay, in the filing  the  complaints  then
even, taking into consideration the robust common sense view of
the  entire circumstances attending all these cases, it must be
said with more than certainty that the alleged  offences  being
'Economic  and continuing offences' also, in very nature of the
facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case,  they  indeed   quite
satisfactorily explain the delay in question as warranted under
Sections  472 and 473 of the Code, to deserve the cognizance of
the same  being  taken.    Still  further,  apart  taking  into
consideration   the   facts   alleged  in  the  complaint  also
constitute offences under the I.P Code.
 
12.2	In this view of the matter, since the grievance  voiced
by the  learned  Advocate  Mr.  Desai is found to be absolutely
justified,  it  is  required  to  be  held  that  the  impugned
judgments   and   orders   passed  by  the  learned  Magistrate
discharging the accused on face of it being illegal and unjust,
the same deserves to be quashed and set-aside and  accordingly,
these  cases are remanded to the trial Court to be disposed off
on merit, according to law, more particularly, in the light  of
the observations made in above para 11.1 of this judgment.
 
13.	In  the  result,  this  group  of 327 criminal revision
application is allowed.   In  all  these  cases,  the  impugned
judgment  and  orders  discharging  the  accused, passed by the
learned  JMFC  (Muni.),  Vadodara  are   hereby   quashed   and
set-aside, and that the cases under these revision applications
are  ordered  to  be  remanded  with a direction to restore all
complaints on record and proceed with the case and  decide  the
same  on  merits,  according to law; especially in the light of
decision of this Court rendered in the case of State of Gujarat
versus Dr.  C.K Patel, reported in (1991) 2, GLH p-354.  It  is
further  directed  that  the Complainant or his successor shall
remaim present on 28-2-1994 before the learned JMFC, Baroda and
take appropriate date  for  proceeding  the  matters  and  will
co-operate  with  the  learned JMFC in disposing of the same as
expeditiously as possible.  After the date is fixed, the notice
to the respondents shall be served through the Complainant with
the help of Police authorities of  the  concerned  areas.    By
chance, if that fails, it is hardly required to be told that it
will  be open to the Court to get it served in any other manner
permitted under the Criminal Procedure Code.
 
14.	The  Registrar  is  directed  to forward a copy of this
judgment to the Secretary, Legal Department, Gandhinagar with a
request to  immediately  forward  the  same  to  the  concerned
Secretary  incharge  of  the  Municipality  with  a  request to
circulate the same to the (i)  Municipal  Commissioners  (Legal
Section)  of  the Municipal Corporations of the State, and (ii)
Chief  Officers  of  the  Municipalities  of  the  State,   for
information.
 
 
****
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prakash*
 
 
