Source: AWS Open Data - indian-high-court-judgments/data/pdf/year=1993/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010007391993_1_2009-05-04.pdf
Ref: data/pdf/year=1993/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010007391993_1_2009-05-04.pdf

 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL No.342 OF 1993
 
 
Against the judgment and order 
of sentence dated 13.10.1993 
passed by Sri Anwar Ahmad, the 
3rd Additional Sessions Judge, 
Nawadah in Sessions Trial No. 
176/81/71/87 
 
 
1. JAGESHWAR MISTRY 
2. SAHDEO MISTRY, SONS OF SRI SOHAR MISTRY 
3. SOHAR MISTRY, SON OF JEHAL MISTRY 
4. NARAIN MISTRY 
5. MANGRU MISTRY, SONS OF JANKI MISTRY 
ALL RESIDENTS OF VILLAGE- BARIARI, P.S. ROH, DISTRICT- NAWADAH 
                                            ------ APPELLANTS 
 
                                     Versus 
 
THE STATE OF BIHAR                                ------ Respondent 
 
 
For the appellants :- Mr. Alok Kr. Sinha, 
 
For the State      :- Mr. S.N. Prasad, A.P.P. 
 
 
 
P R E S E N T 
 
 
THE HON'BLE JUSTICE SMT. SHEEMA ALI KHAN
 
 
 
 
 
 S.A. Khan, J. There are 6 appellants in this case.  
Appellant no. 2 died during the pendency of 
this appeal.  Rest of the 5 have challenged the 
order and judgment passed by 3 rd Additional 
Sessions Judge, Nawadah in Sessions Trial No. 
176/81/71/87 by which the appellants no. 3, 4, 
5 and 6 have been released on probation bonds 
of Rs. 5000/- with two sureties of the like 
amount each for a period of two years to appear 
and receive sentence when called upon during 
 
 
2 
such period and in the meantime to keep the 
peace and maintain good behaviour.  Appellant 
no. 1 Jageshwar Mistry has been sentenced to 
undergo R.I. for five years and to pay a fine 
of Rs. 1000/- for the offence under Section 326 
of the Indian Penal Code and in default of 
which to undergo R.I. for further period of six 
months.  Appellant no. 1 also sentenced to 
undergo R.I. for one year for the offence under 
Sections 148 and 329 of the Indian Penal Code.  
Appellant no. 2 Sukar Mistry who has died was 
convicted under Sections 148, 324 and 436 of 
the Indian Penal Code. 
The prosecution case is that on 
28.10.1980 at about 11 a.m. the appellants 
armed with lathis, swords and stones came to 
the house of the informant Karu Mistry.  There 
was a free fight between the parties and it is 
alleged that Sukar Mistry set fire to the house 
of the informant whereas Mangru Mistry threw 
stones at the informant and others.  Jageshwar 
Mistry assaulted Bhola Mistry with a sword on 
his left wrist whereas Sahdeo Mistry assaulted 
Laksho Mistry with a sword on the head and 
fingers of right hand.  Narayan Mistry 
 
 
3 
assaulted the informant with lathi. 
Seven witnesses have been examined in 
this case.  P.Ws. 1 and 2 have been declared 
hostile.  P.W. 2 is the formal witness.  The 
informant Karu Mistry is P.W. 5 whereas P.Ws. 
3, 6 and 7 are the injured witnesses. 
The injury reports of Laksho Mistry, 
Karu Mistry and Bhola Mistry are on record.  
All except Bhola Mistry had received simple 
injuries.  The court has thus released the 
persons who inflicted injuries on Laksho 
Mistry, Prayag Mistry and Karu Mistry on 
probation whereas appellant no. 1 who had 
inflicted a sword injury on Bhola Mistry P.W. 
7, has been convicted under Section 326 of the 
Indian Penal Code. 
At present this Court is only 
concerned with the evidence of P.W. 7 who was 
injured by Jageshwar Mistry.  It has been 
pointed out by the learned counsel for the 
appellants that in the Chief Bhola Mistry has 
stated that he was given a blow by a sword by 
appellant no. 1 and due to injury it has become 
difficult for him to use his thumb.  The 
evidence of P.W. 8 i.e. the doctor indicates 
 
 
4 
that Bhola Mistry received an incised wound 5½ 
x 1” bone deep over left forearm close to wrist 
joint and root of the thumb caused by sharp 
cutting weapon, therefore, it appears that 
there is no discrepancy between the evidence of 
P.W. 7 and the doctor. 
On behalf of the appellants it has 
been submitted that there is a bonafide land 
dispute between the parties which has been 
mentioned in the impugned judgment as well.  It 
is stated that the informant had purchased the 
plot of land on which the occurrence is said to 
have taken place just two months prior to the 
occurrence and it is the case of the defence 
that the defence was in possession of the said 
land which had illegally been occupied by the 
informant which has led to the said occurrence 
in this case.  It has been submitted that the 
occurrence took place on the spur of the moment 
over a bonafide dispute and it has been also 
accepted that the title suit was pending at the 
time of the occurrence for the said piece of 
land and as such in a free fight between the 
parties it cannot be presumed that there was an 
intention to inflict injuries which may have 
 
 
5 
resulted in death of any one of the parties. 
This Court finds on the basis of the 
materials on record that the occurrence took 
place due to a land dispute on the spur of the 
moment where it has been alleged that the 
informant had illegally tried to enter the 
disputed plot, whereas, the prosecution has 
alleged that the informant was trying to oust 
them from the hut constructed by the 
informant’s side on the disputed plot and as 
such this Court alters the sentence passed 
under Sections 326 and 148 of the Indian Penal 
Code to sentence already undergone and directs 
that the appellant Jageshwar Mistry to pay a 
fine of Rs. 2,000/- to Bhola Mistry the person 
who was injured in the occurrence.  The above 
sentence is reduced for the reason that the 
occurrence took place in 1980 and it would be 
unfair to send the appellant back to custody 
after a period of 29 years.  As far as the case 
of the appellant nos. 3, 4, 5 and 6 are 
concerned, the probation period of two years 
elapsed a long time to go and as such their 
case is not being considered on merits by this 
Court. 
 
 
6 
The fine imposed on appellant no. 1 
Jageshwar Mistry should be paid by him within a 
period of two months from the date of receipt 
of the notice of the Court below and default in 
payment will result in further simple 
imprisonment for a period of three months.  The 
appellant no. 1 is discharged from the 
liabilities of his bail bond.  The appeal is 
dismissed with aforesaid modification in 
sentence. 
 
 
Patna High Court, 
May, 4th, 2009 
N.A.F.R./Sanjay 
                (Sheema Ali Khan, J.) 
 
