Source: AWS Open Data - indian-high-court-judgments/data/pdf/year=1992/court=8_9/bench=rhcjodh240618/RJHC010010541992_1_2018-04-02.pdf
Ref: data/pdf/year=1992/court=8_9/bench=rhcjodh240618/RJHC010010541992_1_2018-04-02.pdf

HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE FOR  RAJASTHAN AT
JODHPUR.
..
(1) S.B. Civil First Appeal No. 23 / 1993
(Arising out of Civil Original Suit No.104/1987)
Swaroop Singh son of Doongar Singhji Devra, resident of Mev,
District: Sirohi.               –---Appellant
Versus
Subhash Singh son of Shri Khuman Singhji Ranawat, residen t of
Kankarva, Tehsil Kapasan, District Chittorgarh.    ----Respo ndent
(2) S.B. Civil First Appeal No.154 / 1992
(Arising out of Civil Original Suit No.47/1986)
Appellants :
Legal Representatives of Nathu Lal son of Modilal Mali:
1/1. Legal Representatives of Ganesh Lal son of Nathulal Mali:
1/1/1. Smt. Geeta Mali widow of Ganesh Mali
1/1/2. Chetan Mali son of Ganesh Mali
   Both residents of New Mali Colony,
   Jhada Aamla Tekri Road, Udaipur
1/1/3. Sunita Mali wife of Puneet Bamnoshia
1/1/4. Jaya Mali wife of Suresh Mali
1/1/5. Sashi Mali wife of Wardichand Mali
  All daughters of Ganesh Mali
  All residents of 16, New Ashok Vihar, Chandanwadi
  Road, Gali No. 4, Udaipur
(2 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
1/2. Smt. Shanta Devi wife of Shri Narainlal (d/O Nathulal Mali)
Resident of Bhopalpura, Udaipur
Through power of attorney holder
Narainlal son of Hari Ram Mali
resident of Sardarpura, Udaipur.
----(defendant)
Versus
Respondent :
Subhash Singh son of Shri Khuman Singhji Ranawat, Reside nt of
Kankarva, Tehsil Kapasan, District Chittorgarh.
----(plaintiff)
Connected With
(3) S.B. Civil First Appeal No. 141 / 1992
(Arising out of Civil Original Suit No.48/1986)
Swaroop Singh son of Shri Doongar Singhji Devra, resident of
Mev, District Sirohi.                                                 –---Appellant
Versus
Subhash Singh son of Shri Khuman Singhji Ranawat, Reside nt of
Kankarva, Tehsil Kapasan, District Chittorgarh.        ---Respondent
(4) S.B. Civil First Appeal No. 142 / 1992
(Arising out of Civil Original Suit No.50/1986)
Narayan  Lal  son  of  Shri  Hari  Ramji  b/c  Mali,  resident of
Sardarpura, Udaipur.       ----Appellant
Versus
Subhash Singh son of Shri Khuman Singhji Ranawat, Reside nt of
Kankarva, Tehsil Kapasan, District Chittorgarh.    ----Respo ndent
(3 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
(5) S.B. Civil First Appeal No. 22 / 1993
(Arising out of Civil Original Suit No.49/1986)
Swaroop Singh son of Shri Doongar Singhji Devra, resident of
Mev, District Sirohi.       –---Appellant
Versus
Subhash Singh son of Shri Kuman Singhji Ranawat, residen t of
Kankarva, Tehsil Kapasan, District Chittorgarh.    ----Respo ndent
_____________________________________________________
For Appellant(s)    :  Ms Rekha Borana
For Respondent(s) :  Mr. Arpit Bhoot
_____________________________________________________
JUSTICE DINESH MEHTA
Judgment
 02.04.2018  
The  present  group  of  appeals  arise  out  of  five  separate
judgments  dated  20.08.1992  passed  by  learned  Addl.  District
Judge No.2, Udaipur (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Trial Court’) in
five  civil  suits  involving  common  question  of  facts  and  law,
questioning the identical sale deeds executed by defendant No.2 –
Smt. Anand Kumari.
All the five appeals are being decided conjointly vide thi s
common order. However, the facts relating to Civil First  Appeal
No.23/1993 (Swaroop Singh Vs. Subhash Singh), emanating fr om
the  judgment  and  decree  passed  in  Civil  Original  Suit
No.104/1987  (Old  No.103/1978)  are  being  taken  into
consideration, as a lead case.  
(4 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
The facts apropos this appeal are that one Khuman Singh
sold a part of open land ‘Badi’, vide registered sale deed da ted
24.08.1996 to his wife – Smt. Anand Kumari. Said Kh uman Singh
died  on  02.01.1972,  whereafter  his  wife  Smt.  Anand  Kumari
adopted Subhash Singh, the plaintiff – respondent herein as per
Hindu customs and rituals. Anand Kumari – owner of the land in
question thereafter sold a part of the said land to defen dant No.1
– Raj Kumari and executed a registered sale deed on 25.05.1976.
The plaintiff Subhash Singh – the adopted son, instituted  a
suit for declaration and possession, inter alia, contendin g that his
natural father Narendra Singh Ranawat had given him in  adoption
to Sh. Khuman Singh Ranawat, on whose behalf, the defenda nt
No.2 – Smt. Anand Kumari had observed the requisite c eremony
as per the customs prevalent. The plaintiff stated tha t apart from
observing customary formalities on 14.1.1972, the defendant No.2
– Smt. Anand Kumari executed an adoption deed, ratifyin g the
adoption, which was on behalf of herself and her husband Shri
Khuman Singh Ranawat.  It has also been asserted in t he plaint
that at the time of adoption, with a view to protect the  plaintiff’s
interest, who was a minor at the relevant time, the defendant
No.2 had also executed an agreement (on the same date  viz.
14.1.1972), in favour of his natural father Narendra S ingh, inter
alia, assuring that all the properties belonging to her a nd her
husband would not be sold and that the plaintiff would be the sole
owner / successor for the same. 
(5 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
Laying challenge to the sale deed dated 25.05.1976, th e
plaintiff contended that the contentious sale of plot No. 225 carved
out of House No.26/560, situated in Sardarpura, Udaipur by  the
defendant No.2 – Smt. Anand Kumari was illegal and unauthorized
in teeth  of  the  agreement dated  14.1.1972;  for which it was
sought to be declared illegal and without authority.
The plaintiff’s entire case was edificed on the agreem ent
dated 14.1.1972, purportedly executed by his adoptive mothe r
Smt. Anand Kumari, at the time of his adoption.  The pl aintiff
contended that the sale in question to defendant No.1 wa s illegal
and liable to be declared as such, because the plaintif f having
been adopted by defendant No.2 and her husband Khuman Sin gh,
was the sole owner of the properties, belonging to them. It was
thus prayed that the sale deed dated 26.5.1976 for the properties
described in para No.4 of the plaint be declared null and void and
ineffective against his rights.
In response to the suit so filed by the plaintiff, defe ndant
No.1  –  Smt.  Raj  Kumari  filed  a  written  statement  and  while
disputing  the  factum  of  execution  of  the  agreement  dated
14.1.1972, pleaded her ignorance about the same. It was in the
alternative contended that as she was not given any int imation or
notice of such agreement, it was inoperative qua her. It was also
asserted  that  she  was  a  bonafide  purchaser,  with  whom  the
defendant No.2 had entered into an agreement of sale w ay back
on 7.2.1968, even prior to the adoption of the plaintiff.  The
defendant No.1 asserted that as the plaintiff had not issued any
(6 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
public notice of the alleged agreement dated 14.1.1972, he cannot
take any advantage of the same against the interests of defendant
No.1 – a bonafide purchaser.
The defendant No.2 – Smt. Anand Kumari – mother of th e
plaintiff filed a written statement and she also di sputed the very
execution of the alleged agreement dated 14.1.1972.  Smt. Anand
Kumari maintained that on 14.1.1972, only the adoption deed was
signed  by  her;  and  that  the  agreement  dated  14.1.1972
mentioned in the plaint was a forged document.    The def endant
No.2  asserted  that  the  plot  in  question  was  her  self-acquired
property, having purchased from her husband Shri Khuman S ingh
vide a registered sale deed, for which she was legally co mpetent
to deal with it.  She also stated in her written sta tement that she
had  entered  into  an  agreement  of  sale  for  the  contentious
property to the defendant No.1 on   7.2.1968, while handi ng over
the possession of the plot to her and it was only in furt herance of
such contract of sale, the sale deed dated 25.5.1976 c ame to be
executed.  
At the time of admission and denial of the documents, th e
defendant No.2 categorically refused to have signed and  executed
the  agreement  (Exhibit-2)  dated  14.1.1972,  but  accepted  the
execution of the adoption deed dated 14.1.1972 (Ex.1) filed  along
with the plaint.
On the basis of the pleading of the parties, the Trial C ourt
framed following issues :-
(7 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
^^1- D;k izfroknh;k ua- 2 us fnukad 14@1@72 dks oknh
dh vksj ls mlds dqnrhZ firk Jh ujsUnzflag ds i{k
esa ,d vuqca/k Jh [kqekuflagth ,oa Lo;a dh tk;nkn
dks [kqnZcqnZ] jgu] csg ugha djus ckcr fy[kk \
2- D;k csgukek fnukad 26@5@76 oknh ds eqdkcys esa
'kwU; gksdj csvlj gS \
3- D;k fooknxzLr laifr izfroknh ua- 2 dh L=h/ku gksus ls
mls bls LFkkukUrj.k djus dk vf/kdkj gS \
4- izfrdkj D;k gS \**
On behalf of the plaintiff, PW-1  Subhash Singh; his na tural
father  PW-2  Narendra  Singh;  PW-3  Chandanmal;  PW-4  Sajjan
Singh;  and  PW-5  Pratap  Singh  appeared  in  the  witness  box;
whereas DW-1 Narayan Lal; DW-2 Anand Kunwar; DW-3 Jasw ant
Singh; and DW-4 Hemchandra Trivedi appeared in the witness box
to give their evidence.
The Trial Court, after appreciation of the evidence both o ral
and ocular, decided Issue No.1 in favor of the plaintiff and held
that the defendant No.2 – Smt. Anand Kumari had execu ted the
agreement dated 14.1.1972 (Ex.2) in favour of plaintiff ’s natural
father – Narendra Singh and undertook not to sell, aliena te or
transfer  her  properties  and  the  properties  belonging  to  her
husband.  
The Trial Court decided  Issue No.2 also in favour of the
plaintiff and held that the defendant No.2, having ex ecuted the
agreement  dated  14.1.1972  was  precluded  from  selling  the
(8 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
property, vide subject sale deed dated 25.5.1976 to the defendant
No.1. 
Issue No.3, as to “whether the contentious property was
‘stridhan’ of defendant No.2, for which she was not autho rised to
transfer the same”; has also been decided in favour of the plaintiff
and against the defendant.  While relying upon the judgme nt of
Hon’ble Supreme Court, rendered in AIR 1991 p.1869, the Trial
Court held that despite the property in question being a ‘ stridhan’,
the sale effected by the defendant No.2 is void in ligh t of the
agreement she had entered into, whereby she had bound herself
that she would not sell or alienate the same.
Having recorded these findings and decided the issues in
favour of the plaintiff, the Trial Court decreed the suit and declared
the sale deed dated 26.5.1976 to be null and void.  Whil e doing
the same, the Trial Court had also directed the defenda nt No.1 to
hand over the vacant possession of the said property wit hin a
period of two months vide operative portion of the judgment an d
decree dated 20.08.1992, which reads thus :-
^^11- mi;qZDr leLr foospu ds QyLo:i oknh dk okn
fo:)  izfroknh  lO;;  fMØh  fd;s  tkus  ;ksX;  gSA
ifj.kkeLo:i oknh dk okn bl izdkj fMØh fd;k tkrk gS fd
foØ;i= fnukad 26@5@76 rknknh :i;k 20]000@& tks
okn ds isjk ua- 4 esa vafdr laifr ds fo"k; esa izfroknh x.k ua-
2 }kjk izfroknh ua- 1 ds gd esa fu"ikfnr fd;k x;k mls 'kwU;
,oa izHkkoghu ?kksf"kr fd;k tkrk gS rFkk oknh ds okn i= ds
isjk ua- 4 esa vafdr IyksV ij oknh dks vkf/kiR; lqiqnZ  djus
ckcr izfroknhx.k ds fo:) lO;; fMØh fd;k tkrk gSA
(9 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
fookfnr ijhlj dks [kkyh djus gsrq izfroknhx.k dks nks ekg
dk le; fn;k tkrk gSA**
Calling  in  question  the  judgment  and  decree  dated
20.08.1992  passed  by  the  Court  below,  Ms.  Rekha  Borana
contended  that  the  learned  Trial  Court  has  seriously  erred  in
decreeing the suit filed by the plaintiff – respondent herein.  She
pointed out that during the pendency of the suit, defendant No.2 –
Smt. Anand Kumari had died and the plaintiff had ta ken no steps
for substitution of her legal representatives, as a res ult whereof,
the suit in question stood abated.  It was further contende d by
learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  that  defendant  No.1  –  Raj
Kumari had also died on 30.01.1990 and the plaintiff f iled an
application  seeking  substitution  of  her  husband  only,  without
bringing her other existing legal representatives on rec ord.  In
light of these facts, learned counsel for the appellant a rgued that
the  suit  in  question  had  since  abated  and  was  liable  to be
dismissed for non-joinder of necessary parties.  
Ms.  Borana  vehemently  argued  that  ignoring  these
fundamental  lacunae in the frame of suit, the Trial c ourt had
seriously  erred  in  passing  the  judgment  and  decree  under
consideration,  particularly  when  no  legal  representatives  of
defendant No.2  - the seller of the property had been brought  on
record.
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  pointed  out  that  the
defendant No.2 – the seller of the property, Smt. Anand K umari
(10 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
earlier  having  refused  the  execution  of  the  agreement  dated
14.1.1972,  in  her  written  statement  had  later  admitted  her
signatures  on  the  document  Ex.2,  when  she  appeared  in  the
witness box, which admission has prevailed over the min d of the
Court below.  Learned counsel for the appellant contended th at
the testimony of Anand Kumari is worthless and meant only to be
discarded out-rightly in the facts peculiar to this case .  Ms. Rekha
Borana further contended that learned Trial Court has failed to
consider a vital aspect of the matter that the property i n question
was a self acquired property of defendant No.2 – Anand Kum ari,
who was vested with all rights, including right to sel l and alienate.
She contended that Anand Kumari had agreed to sell the  plot in
question way back on 7.2.1968, even before adopting the plai ntiff
(14.1.1972) and the said property was in continued poss ession of
defendant  No.1  –  Raj  Kumari;  and  that  the  sale  deed  dated
25.5.1976 was only an act in furtherance of the earl ier contract of
sale. She asserted that the agreement dated 14.1.1972  (Ex.2)
was a forged document and that is why, the same was no t placed
along  with  the  written  statement.   She  submitted  that the
defendant No.2 had also alleged the agreement dated 14.1 .1972
to be a forged document and had taken a specific plea tha t no
such agreement was executed by her. Ms. Borana argued  that the
defendant  No.2  was  bound  by  her  stand  and  any  deposition
contrary to it cannot be given any credence, in view o f the settled
law that a party is bound by his/her pleadings and evidenc e or
statement contrary to such pleadings cannot be looked into.
(11 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
In last, Ms Borana contended that without prejudice to h er
earlier arguments, even if it is assumed that the a greement dated
14.1.1972 (Ex.2) was executed, the said document cannot be read
in evidence and no rights flowing therefrom can be asserted as the
same was an unregistered document.  Extending her argum ent
further, she urged that purported agreement seeks to e xtinguish
or relinquish her rights in the immoveable property, in fa vour of
the  plaintiff,  for  which  it  was  compulsorily  required  to  be
registered, as per the provisions contained under Section 1 7 (1)
(b) of the Registration Act, 1882. In absence of registrati on, the
same cannot be gone into as mandated by Section 49 of the
Registration Act, maintained learned counsel.
Learned counsel for the appellant argued that the documen t
Ex.2 on which the entire case of the plaintiff reste d, could not be
read in evidence, while relying upon the judgment of  Hon’ble
Supreme Court rendered in case of Dina Ji & Ors., Vs. D addi
&  Ors.,  reported  in  AIR  1990  SC  1153.  Elaborating  her
contentions in light of the judgment of Apex Court, she argu ed
that the document Ex.2, admittedly an unregistered docum ent,
can neither be led in evidence nor the proprietary rights of the
appellant can be said to be extinguished or relinquished i n favour
of the plaintiff, without a registered document.  The relevant part
of the said judgment is being reproduced hereunder :-
“9. This Section enacts that when the parties intend to
limit the operation of proviso © to S.12, it is open to
them by an agreement and it appears that what she
included  in  the  present  deed  of  adoption  was  an
(12 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
agreement to the contrary as contemplated in S.13 of
the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act.
10. Section 17 (1) (b) of the Registration Act clearly
provides that such a document where any right in
immovable property is either assigned or extinguished
will required registration.  It could not be disputed
that this part of the deed which refers to creation of
an  immediate  right  in  the  adopted  son  and  the
divesting of the right of the adoptive mother in the
property will squarely fall within the ambit of S.17 (1)
(b) and therefore under S.49 of the Registration At,
this could not be admitted if it is not a registered
document.  Unfortunately,  the  Hon’ble  Judge  of  the
High Court did not notice this aspect of the matter
and felt that what could not be done because of the
proviso (c) to S.12 has been specifically provided in
the document itself but this  part of  the document
could  not  be  read  in  evidence  as  it  could  not  be
admitted.  In view of this, the appeal is allowed.  The
judgments of the High Court and that of the lower
appellate Court are set aside and that of the Trial
court  is  restored.   In  view  of  these  special
circumstances, there is no order as to costs.”
Learned counsel for the appellant cited another judgment o f
Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of Chiranjilal Srilal Goenka Vs.
Jasjit Singh & Ors., reported in AIR 2001 SC 266 , wherein
the same principle has been elucidated. Relevant Para 2 1 of the
said judgment is reproduced hereinfra :-
“21.  As against this, learned senior counsel for the
respondent Mr. Sanghi submitted that the aforesaid
letter si not to be construed as a deed, but is to be
(13 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
taken as an offer letter and by conduct of adopting
Radheshyam as son, Chiranjilal could not dipose of
the property by will.  In our view, this argument is
totally devoid of any substance because if reliance is
required to be placed on the letter for holding that it
restrains Chiranjilal to dispose of the property by will,
then it is required to be read as a document which
limits the rights of Chiranjilal to deal with his proper ty
including the immovable property.  Therefore, it would
require  registration.   In  any  case,  the  aforesaid
question is not required to be considered in detail
because we have already arrived at the conclusion
that there is no agreement between the parties before
adoption  indicating  any  contrary  intention  as
contended.” 
Navigating  the  Court  through  the  statements  of  various
witnesses, particularly the statement of Jawan Singh Ranawant,
the natural grand-father of the plaintiff, learned coun sel for the
appellant argued that their statements are most importan t and
looking to his relations with the plaintiff and his sta tus in the
Society, they  deserve due weightage. Learned  counsel  for the
appellant  submitted  that  Shri  Jawan  Singh  DW-3  had  clearly
stated  that  on  the  fateful  day  of  the  plaintiff’s  adoption,
Chandanmal the ‘Kaamdar’ was not available in the town, whereas
the crucial document Ex.2 had been drawn in the handwr iting of
said Chandanmal, purportedly on the same date.  
Ms. Borana in light of these facts contended that Shri Jawan
Singh had denied not only the presence of Chandanmal but al so
the factum of execution of the agreement - Ex.2. She a sserted
(14 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
that  these  facts  and  circumstances  clearly  suggest  that  the
agreement dated 14.1.1972 (Ex.2) was a forged and fabric ated
document.   
While resting her arguments, Ms. Rekha Borana inform ed
that Shri Jawan Singh – natural grand-father of plaintif f was a
man  of  repute,  having  held  esteemed  position  of  a  Judge  of
Rajasthan  High  Court  from  29.08.1949  to  10.10.1961.  She
submitted that testimony of such revered person, who oth erwise
was closely related to the plaintiff should not be disbeli eved or
discarded, particularly when he was the person who had drafted
the adoption deed and at whose request, the defendant No.1  was
persuaded to adopt the plaintiff. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  cited  the  following
judgments  in  support  of  her  submissions  that  variance  in
pleadings and proof is not permissible :-
1. AIR 1974 SC 471 (Nagindas Ramdas Vs. Dalpatram Ichhar am) 
   (para 27)
2. 2015 AIR (SCW) 6475 (Ram Niranjan Vs. Sheo Prakash) 
   (para 23 & 24)
3. 2011 AIR (SCW) 1061 (Kalyan Singh Chouhan Vs. C.P. Joshi) 
   (paras 17, 18, 22 and 24)
4. 2003 AIR (SCW) 6005 (Sushil Kumar Vs. Rakesh Kumar)
5. AIR 1974 Raj. 73; Kusum Chand Vs. Kanhaiyalal) (para 6 & 9)
(15 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
Learned counsel cited judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court,
reported in AIR 2004 SC 3974 (Ugre Gowda Vs. Nagegowda) in  a
bid to contend that mere adoption does not deprive a widow of her
right to dispose of her self acquired property.
Mr.  Arpit  Bhoot,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents
supporting  the  judgment  and  decree  under  consideration
submitted that the appellant – defendant has taken a ref uge of an
agreement to sell dated 7.2.1968, which agreement firstly has not
been proved and even if the same is proved, it does not h elp the
case of the appellant. The reason being, that by virtue of the
execution of the document dated 14.1.1972 (Ex.2), the appellant’s
power  of  transferring  or  alienating  any  of  her  properties was
captivated or ceased, notwithstanding the prior agreement.  
Mr. Bhoot submitted that the appellant has not been able to
cite any judgment or provision of law, which requires a public
notice of the agreement Ex.2.  He argued that the agreement Ex.2
has  its  own  effect  and  the  appellant-defendant,  pleading  or
proving ignorance of such document, cannot claim immunity  from
the rigours of law.  According to him, the appellant can not claim
herself to be a bonafide purchaser to claim immunity fr om the
force  of  the  binding  agreement  and  avoid  the  decree  under
consideration.  Responding to the argument of the appellant that
as stated by Anand Kumari in her written statement,  the consent
of Subhash Singh had been obtained;  Mr. Bhoot argued that such
consent is inconsequential, particularly because Subhash Singh –
the plaintiff was minor at the time of execution of the sale deed
(16 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
and  secondly  and  more  importantly,  as  the  agreement  (Ex.2)
stipulated the consent of his father Narendra Singh.  Ev en if it is
presumed that the respondent – plaintiff had given cons ent for
alienation of the ‘Badi’ in question, being ignorant of his rights, the
contentious sale was void and contrary to the agreement  dated
14.1.1972, assertively argued Mr. Bhoot.
He  added  that  all  the  witnesses,  may  be  the  plaintiff’s
witnesses or the defendants’ witnesses, admitted the signatures of
Anand Kumari on the agreement dated 14.01.1972 (Ex.2), w hich
proves the execution of the document Ex.2. In such situ ation and
in face of the document Ex.2, any sale made by the defen dant
No.2 was illegal and contrary to the agreement or the promise she
had  made  to  the  plaintiff’s  father.   Learned  counsel  for  the
respondent cited judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of
B.T. Govindappa Vs. B. Narasimhaiah, reported in AIR 19 91 SC
1969. Claiming parity from the facts and law enunciat ed therein,
he contended that in present case also, the defendant N o.2 Anand
Kumari, having agreed to refrain from selling the proper ty, could
not sell the same and the sale deed executed in favour  of the
defendant No.1 (appellant) was clearly in contravention of the
restriction so imposed by Smt. Anand Kumari on herself,  vide
Ex.2.  Relevant para No.6 of the aforesaid judgment is be ing
reproduced hereinfra :-
“6.  The  High  Court  did  not  find  favour  with  the
contentions raised on behalf of the appellant.  The
High Court held that the sale deed in favour of the
appellant  was  clearly  in  contravention  of  the
(17 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
restriction imposed on Smt. Thimmamma in exhibit D-
1 and as such the sale deed Exhibit P-1 was invalid in
law and conferred no title in the suit property on the
appellant.  In our opinion the High Court was right in
taking the aforesaid view on account of the contents
of exhibit D-1.  There can be no manner of doubt that
a Hindu woman is the full owner and entitled to deal
with her stridhan property as she likes.  She can also
put any restriction or curtailment of her rights by her
own consent and free will in her stridhan property.  In
the present case B. Narasamiah came by adoption in
the family of Chikkahanumaiah and as a consequence
of which he lost his right in the property of his natura l
father.  At the time of adopting B. Narasamaiah not
only  Chikkahanumaiah  but  Smt.  Thimmamma  also
agreed to grant the right of co-ownership in all the
properties  mentioned  in  the  schedule  which
admittedly  included  the  stridhan  property  of  Smt.
Thimmamma  also.   Smt.  Thimmamma  also  put  a
restriction on her rights in the immovable properties
detailed  in  the  schedule  and  agreed  that  B.
Narasamiah will have complete title after their death
over all the immovable and movable properties and
they will not transfer any property mentioned in the
schedule in future and B. Narasamiah will also not
transfer any property during their lifetime.  The above
recitals  unmistakably  go  to  show  that  Smt.
Thimmamma had agreed not to transfer the property
in question and as such the sale made in favour of the
appellant is invalid.  Learned counsel for the appellant
was unable to show any infirmity in the Judgment of
the High Court.  We are happy to note that on our
suggestion learned counsel for the respondent was
able to persuade the respondent to pay an amount of
(18 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
Rs.15,000/- to the appellant as a gesture of goodwill
within two weeks from today.”
Mr.  Arpit  Bhoot  contended  that  the  appellant  had  never
questioned the admissibility of the agreement - Ex.2 before  the
Trial Court and it is for the first time in the appeal,  the question
regarding admissibility of the document has been raised by the
appellant.  He contended that the admissibility of the do cument
cannot be raised at appellate stage, when no such object ion was
raised  by  the  concerned  party  at  the  time  of  accepting  the
document or leading the same in evidence.
In support of his arguments, Mr. Bhoot cited the judgment
rendered by Hon’ble the Supreme Court in case of Javer Ch and &
Ors.  Vs.  Pukhraj Surana, reported in AIR 1961 SC 1655.
He submitted that the above judgment has been followed by
the Hon’ble Apex Court in Shyamal Kumar Roy Vs. Sushil Kumar
Agarwal (2006) 11 SCC 331 and by this Court in the cas e of
Jagdish Vs. Smt. Deepsikha Garg, reported in 2013 (3) RL W 2562
(Raj.).  He  added  that  the  judgment  passed  by  the  Hon’ble
Supreme Court in Javer Chand & Ors., Vs. Pukhraj Sura na still
holds the field and the judgment relied upon by the appellant does
not cover this aspect and as such cannot lend any suppor t to the
appellant.
Having  argued  the  case,  Mr.  Bhoot  has  filed  the  written
submissions 2 days later and cited following two judgments  to the
(19 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
effect that a judgment passed without considering principle of law,
cannot be treated as precedent :-
(i) Satish Kumar Gupta Vs. State of Haryana, reported in (2017) 4
SCC 760
(ii) State of Uttranchal Vs. Sandeep Kumar Singh, repor ted in
(2010) 12 SCC 794.
As is evident from the written submissions,  these judgments
have been cited by Mr. Bhoot in support of his contention th at the
judgment rendered  in case of Dina ji (supra), relied  upon by
appellant, is of no help to them, as the question of admi ssibility of
the  contentious  agreement  (Ex.2)  had  never  been  put  in
question.
Ms. Rekha Borana, canvassing the cause of the appellan t in
rejoinder, submitted that without prejudice to her argumen t that
the agreement Ex.2, was never executed by the defendant  No.2 –
Anand Kumari, the agreement dated 14.1.1972 (Ex.2) has  to be
read in its entirety.  She submitted that if the dis puted document
is  read  as  a  whole,  it  transpires  that  there  was  no  absolute
embargo on her right to alienate the property. She pointed  out
that there is a stipulation in the agreement that the defendant
No.2 – Smt. Anand Kumari would be entitled to sell th e property,
in case, need so arises, albeit with prior permission.  She added
that though there appears to be some confusion, as to wheth er
the  permission  of  Shri  Narendra  Singh  was  required  or  the
permission of the plaintiff Subhash Singh was to be obtai ned; yet
as the defendant No.2 herself appeared in the witness bo x and
(20 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
deposed  that  the  sale  deed  in  question  was  executed  in
furtherance  of  the  prior  agreement  and  that  Subhash  Singh’s
consent had been obtained, the sale in question could not ha ve
been  set  aside  by  the  Trial  Court  dehors  the  interest  of the
appellant, who had bonafidely purchased the land in quest ion for
consideration.
I have heard learned counsels for the parties and perus ed
the material available on record.  It would be apt to deal  with the
argument  advanced  by  Ms.  Rekha  Borana  in  relation  to  the
admissibility of the document at first as it goes to the  root of the
matter.
There  cannot  be  two  opinions  that  the  fulcrum  of  the
plaintiff’s  purported  right  or  the  case  is  the  agreement dated
14.01.1972 (Ex.2), said to have been executed by the def endant
No.2  –  adoptive  mother  of  the  plaintiff,  on  the  date  of  his
adoption.  A look at the said document shows that the defe ndant
No.2  –  adoptive  mother  of  the  plaintiff  had  surrendered,
relinquished  or  extinguished  her  rights,  not  only  in  her self-
acquired property but also in the property which had devolve d on
her after the death of her husband.  Such a document vide  which
right of a person in an immovable property has been assigned,
extinguished,  transferred  or  relinquished,  is  required  to be
compulsorily registered as mandated vide provisions contain ed in
Section 17 (1) (b) of the Registration Act.  It will not be out of
place to reproduce the provisions contained in Section 17 (1) (b)
of the Registration Act, which read thus :-
(21 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
“17.  Documents  of  which  registration  is
compulsory. - (1) The following documents shall be
registered,  if  the  property  to  which  they  relate  is
situate in a district in which, and if they have been
examined on or after the date on which, Act XVI of
1864,  or  the  Indian  Registration  Act,  1866  (20  of
1866),  or  the  Indian  Registration  Act,  1871  (8  of
1871),  or  the  Indian  Registration  Act,  1877  (3  of
1877), or this Act came on comes into force, namely
(a) … … … 
(b)  other  non-testamentary  instruments  which
purport or operate to create, declare, assign, limit or
extinguish, whether in present or in future, any right,
title or interest, whether vested or contingent, of th e
value of one hundred rupees and upwards, to or in
immovable property;
(c) … … …
(d) … … …
(e) … … ...”        
The judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of Dina Ji
(supra), reported in AIR 1990 (SC) 1153 squarely governs t his
issue and favours the appellant on all fours.  In light o f the said
judgment,  this  Court  has  no  hesitation  in  holding  that
notwithstanding the veracity of the document dated 14.01 .1972
(Ex.2),  such  document  having  effect  of  assignment,
relinquishment or extinguishment of the plaintiff’s righ ts in her
immovable property in favour of the plaintiff is required to be
registered and sans such registration, the contentious do cument
can neither be held valid nor can it be let in evidence . The plaintiff
(22 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
cannot   rely  upon  such  document  to  assert  his  rights  in the
immovable property, as the same is inadmissible in evidence.  
Though the appeal of the appellant deserves to succeed on
this count alone, yet this Court deems it appropriate to dea l with
other arguments also, so vehemently and vociferously adv anced
by the rival counsels.  
Adverting to the first argument put forth by learned c ounsel
for the appellant that the suit in question was incompete nt in
absence of substitution of legal representative(s) of Smt.  Anand
Kumari, defendant No.2 – the vendor; and also on account  of
failure  of  the  plaintiff  to  bring  on  record  all  the  legal
representatives of defendant No.1 – Raj Kumari; for which the suit
was liable to be rejected out-rightly; this Court, despite  finding
some substance in it, is not inclined to accept the sa me and reject
the suit as such. The reasons for such view are not fa r to seek,
firstly because the legal representatives of defendant No .1 – Raj
Kumari – the purchaser have now joined the lis as appell ants in
the present appeal and secondly because the defendant No.2 –
vendor – Smt. Anand Kumari has left behind her, only o ne legal
representative; none other than Subhash Singh, who is a lready
there as the plaintiff in the suit.  In this view of the matter,
technically speaking the arguments advanced on behalf of  the
appellant may have some substance, but it cannot be accepte d
looking to the peculiar facts of the extant case.  Ther e is no
fundamental lacuna in the frame of the suit, for which  it should
shatter to the ground.
(23 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
The  second  argument  of  Ms  Borana  has  been  that  the
testimony  of  the  defendant  No.2  –  Smt.  Anand  Kumari  is
untrustworthy  and  her  admission  about  the  execution  of  the
agreement dated 14.1.1972 deserves to be discarded. This Court
is of the opinion that the Court should give due weightage  to the
deposition of the witnesses, in the witness box which are given in
presence of the Presiding Officer, over the averments  made by a
party in his/her pleadings.  It is true that Smt. Anan d Kumari –
defendant  No.2  had  specifically  denied  the  execution  of  the
contentious  agreement  dated  14.01.1972,  however,  instead of
maintaining such stance, she took a detour and improvise d her
stand by saying that the document bears her signatures,  while
maintaining that someone might have misused her blank s igned
papers, for creation of the document. She, however, mainta ined
that the plaintiff was taken into confidence, when the  sale deed
was executed on 25.5.1976.  A comparative reading of the written
statement of defendant No. 2 and  her statement reveals  that
there is no significant contradiction between the same a nd what
turns  out  from  her  pleadings  and  the  statement  is  that  the
contentious  agreement  dated  14.01.1972  (Ex.2)  bears  her
signatures.  Notwithstanding  this,  the  doubt  still  persists  as  to
whether, the defendant No.2 had executed the subject agreement
in  favour  of  Narendra  Singh  -  plaintiff’s  father,  completely
divesting her rights in her self-acquired property as we ll as the
property belonging to her husband, who had since expired.  T his
Court has sufficient and valid reasons to infer and h old that the
(24 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
subject  agreement  dated  14.01.1972  was  not  executed  by
defendant No.2, which are set out herein below. 
A perusal of the statement given by DW-3 – Shri Jawan
Singh Ranawat unravels the falsehood in the stand of th e plaintiff.
This Court takes cognizance of the fact that Shri Jawan  Singh
Ranawat,  none  other  than  grand-father  of  the  plaintiff,  had
adorned the prestigious seat of this Court from 29.08.194 9 to
10.10.1961.  In considered opinion of this Court, testimony  of a
person having scaled such an esteemed and high position should
be given due weightage, more particularly in facts of the present
case, when he was the natural grand-father of the plaint iff and at
whose request Smt. Anand Kumari – defendant No. 2 had adopted
the plaintiff – Subhash Singh.  Though name of said witne ss was
enumerated in the list of witnesses given by the defendant, yet he
did  not  come  at  his  own  and  was  summoned  by  the  Court,
pursuant to request/prayer so made by the defendants.
According to the deposition of said witness, he had prepare d
the draft of the adoption deed, which came to be written on a
stamp paper brought by Chandanmal – ‘Kamdaar’ and written i n
the hands of Vaidhya Hemchand Trivedi. DW-3 deposed that s aid
‘Kamdaar’ Chandanmal was not present on 14.1.1972, when the
adoption ceremony took place and he had reportedly gone out of
Station. DW-3 had also asserted that neither such agre ement was
executed by Anand Kumari nor any information of such agreement
was ever given to him.  Shri Jawan Singh maintained that had any
intention or understanding of relinquishing the proprietar y right of
(25 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
Anand  Kumari  made  known  to  him,  he  would  have  definitely
incorporated such covenant in the adoption deed itself.  It will not
be out of context to reproduce excerpts from his statement,  as
they have necessary bearing on the case at hand:-
         “c;ku xokg Mh- MCY;w 3 tokuflag jk.kkor
----------- eSas gYQ ls (lkSxU/k) ls dgrk gWwa fd esjk uke toku flag
jk.kkor firk dk uke dqaoj j.k/khj flag dkSe jk.kkor mez 82 o"kZ
--------------  Bkdqj  [kqeku  falg  dh  e`R;q  ds  12  fnu  ckn
mÙkjkf/kdkjh ds ixMh cka/kus dk nLrwj fd;k tkrk gSA Bkd qj
[kqekuflag ds e`R;q ds X;kjos fnu czsxsfM;j tloarflag us dgk
fd ixM+h cka/kus dk nLrwj fjokt ds vuqlkj fd;k tkuk
pkfg;s eq>s dgkA eSaus mudks dgk fd viu fey dj vkuan
dqoj th ds ikl pys vkSj izkFkZuk djs] bl ij eSa] Bkdqj egsUnz
flag o czsxsfM;j lkgc vkSj Hkh ikap lkr fj’rsnkj fey dj
tukus esa vkuandq¡oj ds ikl lqcg 9 cts ukS cts igq¡ps eS aus
bl fo"k; es ckrphr djus ds fy;s czsxsfM;j lkgc dks dg
fn;k Fkk] eSa dqN ugha cksywaxk esus dqN ugha dgk] c zsxsfM;j
lkgc us vkuan dqaoj th dks dgk fd fdlh yM+ds dks xksn ys
yks] mls ixM+h ca/kk nks igys rks vkuan dqaoj us dgk fd D;k
t:jr gS A bUdkj dj fn;k ij czsxsfM;j lkgc ds vkxzg
djus ij mUgksaus dgk fd eSa lqHkk"k dks xksn ys ywaxhA
------------------
----------------  ujsUnz flag us panuey tks ml le; dkenkj  dk
dke Hkh djrk Fkk mldksa diklu Hkstk vkSj LVke isij ml h
jkst eaxk fy;k] nwljs jkst lqcg eSaus ujsUnz flag ls iwNk  rks
mlus crk;k fd xksnukek fy[kkus ds fy;s LVke panuey ys
(26 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
vk;k gSA fQj eSaus xksnukes dk Mªk¶V fy[k dj ujsUnz flag  dks
fn;k vkSj ml dks dgk fd LVkEi ij bl elwns ds eqrkfcd
panuey ls xksnukek fy[kokyksa bl ij ujsUnzflag us eq>s
crk;k fd panuey rks 'kke dks  LVkEi  isij ysdj Hkksiky
lkxj pyk x;k gSA vkSj ;g dg x;k gS fd oks vkt Hkksiky
lkxj ls ugha vk;sxk ml ds ?kj ij dqN dke gSA eSus d gk
oS|jkt gsepan f=osnh th ls fy[kokyksa fQj ujsUnz flag us oS|
jkt gsepan th ls xksnukek fy[kok fy;k tks  Ex1 gSA
-------------------
----------------------  ;g crkrk gwa fd ;g xksnukek  14@1@72 dks
fy[kk x;k ml jkst djhc 10 cts czsxsfM;j tloarflag th]
tksjkoj flag luokM+] MkW- fojsUnz flag vkSj Bkdqj egsU nz flag
th vkSj Hkh nl ikap fj'rsnkj fey dj vkuan dqekjh ds ik l
x;s vkSj mudks xksnukes ij nLr[kr djus dks dgk bl ij
mUgksaus xksnukes ij nLr[kr fd;s tks Ex1 ij A to B gSA
----------------------
-------------------  eSusa Ex2 ns[kk ;s dkxt panuey ds gkFk dk
fy[kk gqvk gS D;ksafd ml ij dkfrc ds nLr[kr panuey ds
gS rkjh[k 14-1-72 gSA vkSj xksnukesa dh rkjh[k Hkh 14-1-72 gSA
ml rkjh[k dks panuey dkadjok esa ekStwn ugh Fkk blls Kkr
gksrk gS fd ;s Ex2 ckn esa fy[kk x;k gSA Ex-2 ij Hkh A
to B vkuan dqekjh th ds nLr[kr gSA ------------------------
-----------------------  Ex-2 ds ckjs esa vkuan dqekjh th us fnukad 14-
1-72 dks eq>s dqN Hkh ugha crk;k ;fn eq>s crk;k tkrk r ks
xksnukes esa ;g Ex2 ds rF; Hkh fy[k nsrk A -------------------------
(27 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
ftjg & Jh odhy xksjokM+k }kjk &
 ujsUnz flag vkuan dqekjh ls ckyk ckyk fey dj Ex2
fy[kok;k gks ;g lEHko ugha gks ldrk D;ksa fd ;fn vku Un
dqoaj th dks fy[kokuk gksrk rks eq> ls t:j dgrhA esjh
xokgh xksnukek Ex1 ij ugha gSA panuey dh fy[kkoV eSa
ugha igpkurk gWaw ij Ex2 ij vkuan dqaoj th ds nLr[kr gS
ftUgs eSa igpkurk gw¡A ---------------------
-------------------------- ujsUnzflag esjk yM+dk gS ml us cVokjs dk nkok
fMLVªhDV tth fprksMx<+ es dj j[kk gS esus dksbZ nkok ugha
fd;k gSA ftl esa eSa Hkh ,d izfroknh gwWA lqHkk"k] uj sUnzflag dk
tk;ank yM+dk gS ftl dks Bkdqj [kqeku flag ds uke ij xksn
fy;k x;k gSA -----------------^^ 
 
 Upon carefully scanning the record, the suit as well as the
other connected cases, this Court could not lay hands on t he
original agreement dated 14.01.1972, which is the basic bone of
contention,  however  a  photocopy  thereof  is  available  and  the
same had been exhibited.  Be that as it may, since obj ection to
this  effect  had  not  been  raised  by  any  of  the  parties, while
tendering  the  same in evidence,  this  Court  does  not  deem it
appropriate to take exception to this.  
Be that as it may, in wake of the pleadings of the parti es,
testimony  of  Anand  Kumari  –  the  purported  executor  of  such
document and statement of DW-3 – Jawan Singh, this Court  is of
(28 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
the opinion that the execution of the document dated 14.1 .1972
itself is in realm of doubt or suspicion.
Now, I proceed to deal with the Judgments cited by the ri val
counsels at Bar.  The first Judgment of Hon’ble the Supreme Court
cited by Ms. Borana in case of Ugre Gowda, AIR 2004 SC  3974,
that mere adoption does not deprive a widow of her right to
dispose  of  her  self-acquired  property,  is  of  little  avail to  the
appellants  in  the  present  facts.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  the
plaintiff’s case is not premised on the factum of adoptio n alone,
but the same had been projected on the document of even da te,
i.e. 14.1.1972, vide which, the defendant No.2 – Anand  Kumari
had seemingly restrained herself from alienating or tr ansferring
her own properties, besides the properties of her husband duly
vested in her. It has not been the case of the plaint iff that as a
result of the adoption simpliciter, the defendant No.2 wa s  stifled
of her right and authority to alienate the property; th e plaintiff’s
case has hinged on the agreement (Ex.2). As such, this j udgment
of  Hon’ble  the  Supreme  Court  is  hardly  of  any  help  to  the
appellant.
Mr.  Arpit  Bhoot  zealously  supporting  the  judgment  and
decree oppugned by the appellant contended that the appellant’ s
reliance on the agreement to sell dated 7.2.1968 is a sham.  
Having considered the pleadings of the parties, statements
and arguments advanced by the appellant, this Court fin ds that
the appellants have not based their right upon the agreeme nt to
sell dated 7.2.1968 but have disclosed the same as an event,
(29 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
leading to the execution of sale deed.  The agreement of 1968 has
been referred to, with a view to canvass that the sa le deed dated
25.5.1976 was a culmination of a prior agreement entere d into
between the parties, even before the adoption took place.  Be that
as it may, since the impugned registered sale deed conve ying the
property to the defendant No.1 has been executed, the agreement
to sell dated 7.2.1968 is insignificant or inconsequenti al and the
same is relevant only for the purpose of complete recital  of facts
of the case.
In response to the argument of the appellant that as the
plaintiff had not given any public notice of the subject  agreement
dated 14.1.1972 (Ex.2), the purchaser’s right cannot be ef fected;
Mr. Bhoot learned counsel for the respondent argued that t here is
neither any such requirement of law, nor the appellants have cited
any provision of law or judgment in support of such contention.
With reference to the contention regarding public notice, this
Court is of the view that though there appears to be no st atutory
requirement,  contemplating  issuance  of  public  notice  of  such
agreement, yet the defendant No.1 – appellant herein has  proved
that  they  had  no  information  about  the  execution  of  the
agreement dated 14.01.1972  (Ex.2).  The appellant – defen dant
No.1 was, therefore, a bonafide purchaser, having purcha sed the
property relying upon title document and the assertion ma de by
the defendant No.2 – Anand Kumari.
The following provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882
protects the interest of the purchaser in the case like this:-
(30 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
“Section 55. Rights and liabilities of buyer and
seller. - In the absence of a contract to the contrary,
the  buyer  and  the  seller  of  immovable  property
respectively are subject to the liabilities, and have the
rights, mentioned in the rules next following, or such
of them as are applicable to the property sold:
(1) The seller is bound -
(a)  to disclose to the buyer any material
defect in the property or in the seller’s
title thereto of which the seller is, and
the buyer is not, aware, and which the
buyer  could  not  with  ordinary  care
discover;
……….…..            …….…...          …….….…..
(c) to answer to the best of his information all
relevant questions put to him by the buyer
in  respect  to  the  property  or  the  title
thereto;
(2)  The seller shall be deemed to contract with
the  buyer  that  the  interest  which  the  seller
professes to transfer to the buyer subsists and
that he has power to transfer the same:
Provided  that,  where  the  sale  is  made  by  a
person in a fiduciary character, he shall be deemed to
contract with the buyer that the seller has done no
act whereby the property is incumbered or whereby
he is hindered from transferring it.“
If the plaintiff wanted to assert that the defendant No.1 had
the  information  or  intimation  about  the  execution  of  the
agreement (Ex.2), the burden to prove such fact lies upon the
plaintiff.  The plaintiff, having failed to discharge  his burden and
(31 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
bring on record the fact that the defendant No.1 had inf ormation
or  knowledge  about  the  agreement  dated  14.01.1972,  the
defendant  No.1  remains  a  bonafide  purchaser  and  her  rights
cannot be given a go-by in the guise of a purported agreement ,
the veracity, authenticity and admissibility whereof i n evidence is
seriously questionable. 
Hence,  even  if  it  is  presumed  that  Anand  Kumari  had
executed the agreement (Ex.2), it was her duty to discl ose this
fact to the buyer, defendant No.1 and on her failure, r ights of
defendant No.1 or the appellant cannot be put to peril.  
Mr. Bhoot’s argument that all the witnesses, including  Anand
Kumari had admitted the signatures on the contentious agreement
dated 14.1.1972, is untenable in the eye of law.  The  Court is
required to weigh the evidence of the parties,  keeping in view the
other antecedent circumstances, such as pleadings and t estimony
of  other  witnesses.   The  fact  that  the  signatures  on  the
contentious document have been proved to be of Anand Kumari, is
by itself not sufficient to prove that such document w as at all
executed, on the date of adoption of the plaintiff Subhash Si ngh.
It is pertinent that the Defendant No.2, Anand Kumari  herself had
not admitted to have executed the document in question a nd she
had only admitted that it bears her signatures. The fac t that two
documents of same date were prepared and written by diffe rent
persons,  in  presence  of  different  witnesses,  and  there  being
absolutely  no  reference  of  the  other  document,  in  these two
(32 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
documents is enough to infer that the other agreement (Ex.2) had
been concocted subsequently.  
The sheet-anchor of the argument of Mr. Bhoot  has been;
the  judgment  of  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of  B.T.
Govindappa, AIR 1991 (SC) 1969. A perusal of the said ju dgment,
more particularly the facts of this case reveals that the adoption
deed itself in the said case, contained a clause, contemplating that
the  adoptive  mother  would  not  sell,  transfer  or  alienate  the
property belonging to her and her husband and more particula rly
the  adoption  deed  in  question  was  a  registered  document.
Whereas  in  the  present  case,  neither  the  adoption  deed  was
registered nor the same contained such a clause; as a gainst this,
another document of the even date was brought to fore to a ssert
that  the  adoptive  mother  had  volunteered  to  surrender  or
relinquish  her  right  of  dealing  with  the  properties.  These  two
crucial facts completely turn the table in favour of the  appellant.
Though  the  adoption  deed  had  been  executed  on  14.1.1972,
which  has  been  admitted  by  all  the  parties,  no  stipulation
regarding restraint on mother’s right to dispose of the pro perty
was contained in it; and such stipulation had been intr oduced vide
another  agreement  dated  14.01.1972  (Ex.2).   Even  if,  the
existence of Exhibit 2 is accepted, admitted or proved, th e same
could  not  have  been  done,  except  by  way  of  a  registered
document,  as  this  kind  of  covenant  amounts  to  cessation  or
relinquishment of rights to transfer an immoveable property.  
(33 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
Much was argued by Mr. Bhoot regarding the question of
admissibility of the document Ex.2 by contending that no such
question regarding the admissibility of the document had bee n
raised by the appellant.  A perusal of the record reveal s that the
appellant  –  defendant  No.1  had  raised  an  objection  albeit
regarding  non-payment  of  requisite  stamp  duty,  when  the
disputed document (Ex.2) was tendered in the evidence; at such
point,  the  plaintiff  had  undertaken  to  pay  the  stamp  duty,  if
payable and on such assurance, the document was admitted  in
evidence.  Though the objection of the defendant No.2 was only in
relation to payment of stamp duty and not about registrati on, yet
it is pertinent that requirement of raising objection a t the time of
tendering  the  document  in  evidence,  and  not  after-wards;  is
confined only about the objection of stamp duty and such principle
is not applicable, when it comes to opposing the admissibilit y of
the document, for want of registration.
Before dealing with this question, it is to be noticed th at the
appellant has taken this ground, specifically in their me mo  of
appeal  and  the  same  has  been  the  principal  argument  from
appellants’ side,  during the course of hearing.  Otherwis e also,
the  question  of  registration  of  document  is  a  fundamental
question, which goes to the root of the matter and hence , the
same can be permitted to be raised at any stage.  There  is no
provision in the Registration Act, which restrict the po wer of the
opposite party to raise such plea of requirement of registr ation at
a subsequent stage, in juxtaposition to Section 36 of the Indian
(34 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
Stamp  Act,  1899  or  Section  40  of  the  Rajasthan  Stamp  Act,
1998.
All the judgments cited by Mr. Bhoot in relation to his plea
that the objection of admissibility cannot be raised at a later stage
are cases where an objection of admissibility of docume nt at a
later stage was raised regarding non-payment or deficit pay ment
of stamp duty.  Hence, these judgments are not applicable  in the
present case. 
The act of conveying an immoveable property by any mode -
sale,  gift  or  relinquishment,  can  be  done  only  by  way  of  a
registered document.  The absence of registration hits a t the very
root of the document and the same can neither be led in evidence,
nor any rights flowing therefrom can be claimed or asserted. 
The proviso to Section 49 of Registration Act also does n ot
come to the rescue of the plaintiff, as the purpose for w hich the
contentious covenant has been relied or placed on record c annot
be said to be a collateral purpose, by any stretch of im agination.
Needless to reiterate that the agreement dated 14.01.1 972 has
been  the  foundational  fact  or  sole  premise  for  asserting  the
plaintiff’s title or property right in the disputed property.
Catena  of  other  decisions,  cited  by  Mr.  Bhoot  on  the
principles of precedents, are not applicable in the facts of the
present case and the same have been cited only with an  anxiety
to contend that judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court rendered in
case of Dina ji (supra) is per-incuriam, as the question regarding
the stage at which such question can be raised, had not be en
(35 of 35) 
                                                                             [CFA-154/1992]         
                           
considered.  In wake of the finding and settled principle  that the
question of registration being a basic question, can be raise d at
any stage, the judgments cited by Mr. Bhoot are of no aid to him. 
As a result of the discussions foregoing, this Court is of  the
considered opinion that the appeal of the appellant deserves to be
and  is  hereby  allowed.   The  judgment  and  decree  dated
20.08.1992  passed  in  Civil  Original  Suit  No.104/1997  in  the
matter of Subhash Singh Vs. Raj Kumari & Ors., is quash ed and
set aside.  The suit filed by plaintiff is dismissed.
Following the judgment aforesaid, all the appeals between
the  common  parties  involving  identical  facts;  pleadings;
statement; and questions of law are allowed and correspon ding
judgment  and  decree  impugned  therein  are  quashed  and  set
aside.  The suit in each case is dismissed.       
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
           
 
(DINESH MEHTA), J.
Arun, PS
