Source: AWS Open Data - indian-high-court-judgments/data/pdf/year=1993/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010007381993_1_2009-05-04.pdf
Ref: data/pdf/year=1993/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010007381993_1_2009-05-04.pdf

 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL No.352 OF 1993
 
 
Against the judgment and order 
of conviction and sentence 
dated 7.10.1993/13.10.1993 
passed by Sri M.L. Hansdah, 
1st Additional Sessions Judge, 
West Champaran, at Bettiah in 
Sessions Trial No. 101/83. 
 
 
1. SUDAMA RAI, SON OF AMBIKA RAI 
2. BIRENDRA RAI, SON OF BALDEO RAI 
BOTH RESIDENTS OF VILLAGE KATHARI, POLICE STATION SIKARPUR (SATHA) 
DISTRICT- WEST CHAMPARAN AT BETTIAH 
                                           ----- APPELLANTS 
 
Versus 
 
      THE STATE OF BIHAR                         ----- RESPONDENT 
 
 
      For the Appellants :- Mr. U.P. Chainpuri, Advocate 
                            Mr. Chandra Mauli Prasad Singh, Advocate 
 
      For the State      :- Mr. S.N. Prasad, A.P.P. 
 
 
 
P R E S E N T 
 
THE HON'BLE JUSTICE SMT. SHEEMA ALI KHAN
 
 
 
 
 
 
 S.A. Khan, J. There are two appellants before this 
Court.  Appellant no. 1 Sudama Rai has been 
sentenced under Section 304 part II of the 
Indian Penal Code to undergo R.I. for six years 
whereas appellant no. 2 Birendra Rai has been 
sentenced to undergo R.I. under Section 324 of 
the Indian Penal Code for two years. 
The prosecution case in short is that 
on 22.9.1991, informant Dharamraj Rai found two 
 
 
2 
goats of accused Suraj Rai (acquitted) grazing 
the ‘Arhar’ field and damaging the crops.   
Informant caught the goats and was taking them 
to cattle pond at Sathi.  When he reached near 
the house of accused Suraj Rai, all the seven 
accused persons including the appellants came 
there variously armed with Bhala, Garasa and 
lathi.  It is said that accused Suraj Rai 
(acquitted) assaulted him with Garasa on his 
head and appellant no. 2, Birendra Rai is said 
to have assaulted him with Bhala causing injury 
on his left arm and other accused persons 
assaulted him with lathi on different parts of 
his body.  On hearing the commotion father of 
the informant Bhual Rai @ Bhual Rao (deceased), 
brother of the informant Ramjee Rai (P.W.5) and 
the ploughman Gaya Raut (P.W.3) rushed to the 
spot and tried to save the informant.  It is 
then alleged that appellant no. 1 Sudama Rai 
assaulted the informant’s father Bhual Rai @ 
Bhual Rao with a Garasa on the head, Bhola Rai 
(acquitted) assaulted Bhual Rai @ Bhual Rao 
with a lathi.  Accused Birendra Rai assaulted 
Ramjee Rai with Bhala causing injury on his 
cheek, and Gaya Raut with Bhala on his thigh.  
 
 
3 
The occurrence took place around 6 p.m.  The 
case was investigated and charge sheet was 
submitted under Section 302 of the Indian Penal 
Code. 
The defence case is that Suraj Rai 
(since dead) was resting in his house when 
Dharamraj Rai, Bipin Rai, Krishna Rai, Ramjee 
Rai and Raja Rai came armed with lathi, Garasa 
and Bhala and began to unfasten the two goats.  
It is alleged that Dharamraj Rai assaulted 
Suraj Rai with Garasa on his head, Krishna Rai 
and Raja Rai assaulted Suraj Rai with a lathi.  
Birendra Rai was also assaulted by Dharamraj 
Rai.  The statement of Suraj Rai was recorded 
at 8 p.m. in the thana.  The defence also took 
a plea of alibi on behalf of Bhola Rai and 
Bhushan Rai.  Out of the seven accused persons, 
Suraj Rai died and four other have been 
acquitted by the Trial Court whereas the 
appellants have been convicted as mentioned 
above. 
During trial 11 witnesses have been 
examined.  Three points have been raised in 
this case.  The first point raised on behalf of 
the appellants is that the statement of the 
 
 
4 
witnesses does not tally with the medical 
evidence.  Secondly it has been submitted that 
the appellants had exercised their right of 
self defence and as such the Court may consider 
acquitting them in the facts of this case and 
thirdly it has been argued that the appellant 
no. 1 had to face the rigor of trial for 10 
years and 28 years have passed before this case 
is being heard and as such this Court should 
accordingly pass an appropriate order taking 
this aspect into consideration. 
It is the consistent evidence of all 
the witnesses P.Ws. 3, 5, 6 and 7 that the 
appellant no. 1 had inflicted a Garasa blow on 
the head of Bhual Rai @ Bhual Rao and the 
injury report indicates that the wound was a 
lacerated one.  P.W. 10 who is the doctor had 
examined Bhual Rai @ Bhual Rao and has 
specifically stated that he did not find any 
incised injury on the head of the deceased.  
The Trial Court has met this submission by 
stating that during the occurrence it is quite 
possible that the witnesses had not 
specifically seen with which part of the Garasa 
the blow was inflicted, and as such has held 
 
 
5 
that since there is consistent evidence of all 
the witnesses that the appellant no. 1 had 
inflicted a Garasa blow on the head of Bhual 
Rai @ Bhual Rao, (the appellant no. 1) is 
liable to be held responsible for the injury. 
On perusal of the evidence I find that the 
witnesses have stated that the Garasa blow was 
inflicted by appellant no. 1.  It has not been 
specifically mentioned which side of the Garasa 
was used for inflicting the blow.  It is 
submitted that some shadow of doubt has been 
raised with respect to the injury caused on 
Bhual Rai @ Bhual Rao.  This Court is however, 
only inclined to consider the alternative 
argument advanced on behalf of the appellant 
no. 1. 
The occurrence as stated earlier took 
place in 1981.  The trial commenced in 1983 and 
judgment was delivered in 1993 therefore, the 
appellants had to face the trial for 10 long 
years before their fate could be decided by the 
Court.  Again in 1993 this appeal was filed 
before the High Court and the matter has been 
taken up 14 years later in the year 2009.  In 
all, 28 years have passed if the date of 
 
 
6 
occurrence is taken into account which in 
itself is sufficient punishment for a person 
(accused).  Besides which the Court has 
estimated the age of Sudama Rai in October 1993 
to be 55 years of age which would make him 
around 70 years today.  Considering the period 
elapsed since the date of occurrence and the 
age of the appellant no. 1, I do not think it 
would be proper for this Court to send the 
appellant no. 1 back to custody and as such the 
sentence under Section 304 part II is altered 
to period undergone with stipulation that the 
appellant no. 1 should pay a fine of Rs. 
5,000/- to the informant Dharamraj Rai or his 
heirs after receipt of notice from the trial 
Court within a period of three months failing 
which he will have to undergo R.I. for three 
months. 
Appellant no. 2 Birendra Rai has been 
convicted to undergo R.I. for two years.  
Considering and applying the same principle 
which has been applied in the case of appellant 
no. 1 and also considering that the appellant 
no. 2 is now 56 years of age, he too should be 
treated in a similar manner.  Considering that 
 
 
7 
the injuries inflicted by appellant no. 2 are 
simple in nature, I hold that he is liable to 
be convicted under Section 323 and thus alter 
the sentence to the period already undergone. 
The appeal is dismissed with the 
aforesaid observations.  The appellants are 
discharged from the liabilities of their bail 
bonds. 
 
 
Patna High Court, 
4th May,  2009 
N.A.F.R./Sanjay 
                (Sheema Ali Khan, J.) 
 
