Source: AWS Open Data - indian-high-court-judgments/data/pdf/year=1993/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010328731993_1_2011-03-25.pdf
Ref: data/pdf/year=1993/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010328731993_1_2011-03-25.pdf

 
 
Criminal Appeal (SJ) No.337 OF 1993 
 
Against the order of conviction and sentenced dated 03.09.1993 passed by 1 st 
Additional District & Sessions Judge, Jamui, in Session Case No. 188 of 
1991/Trial No. 2 of 1992. 
 
UDDIN MIAN @ MUDDIN MIAN, son of Sakul Mian, resident of village – Bijayia, 
P.S. – Sono, District – Jamui. 
-------------Appellant. 
Versus 
The State of Bihar                                                         ----------- Opposite Party. 
******** 
For the Appellant  : Mr. Ranbir Singh, Amicus Curiae 
For the State   : Mr. Ajay Mishra, Additional Public Prosecutor  
 
******** 
                  
P R E S E N T 
 
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AKHILESH CHANDRA 
******** 
 
Akhilesh Chandra, J. The solitary appellant has preferred this 
appeal against order of conviction under section 
364/149 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced to 
undergo rigorous imprisonment for 10 years awarded 
by learned 1 st Additional District and Sessions Judge, 
Jamui, in Session Case No. 188 of 1991/Trial No. 2 of 
1992 on 3rd September 1993. 
2.  The prosecution case is based on the 
fardbeyan (Ext.1) of  Krishna Prasad Burnawal (P.W.2) 
recorded on 13.11.1990 by Surendra Prasad Singh, 
Officer-in-Charge, Sono Police Station, at 8.00 A.M. is 
that in the previous evening at about 6.00 P.M., while 
the informant was at his grocery shop, three persons 
Ramzan Mian, Uddin Mian (appellant) and one Kalho 
 
 
2 
Mian with six unknown well armed arrived. Ramzan 
and Kolha Mian got hold of him besides his son 
Ashoke Kumar Burnawal (P.W.5) aged about 10 years, 
Bijay Burnawal (not examined) aged about 5 years and 
brought all the three to Kadwa Pahari and started 
assaulting for a sum of Rs. 50,000/-. He further 
assured that on payment of the amount they will 
release his eldest son and on assurance let off 
informant and his youngest son Bijay Kumar 
Burnawal, money was to be paid to Ramzan Mian. 
Reason behind the occurrence as stated is that 
Ramzan Mian had taken some article on credit from 
his shop on demand he threatened for dire 
consequences. The miscreants proceeded towards 
west of his house with P.W.3 the informant, when his 
youngest son was returning to his house in the way 
met with the villagers who had assembled there after 
learning about the occurrence on their request he 
disclosed names of three miscreants and happenings 
with him. Meanwhile, the appellant Uddin Mian @ 
Muddin Mian  was apprehended by the villagers on 
chase who confessed the guilt in their presence and 
was handed over to Chowkidar and Dafadar (both not 
examined). During chase, he also sustained some 
simple injuries, in the morning the villagers with 
 
 
3 
apprehended appellant came to police station where 
he was handed over and fardbeyan was recorded on 
the basis whereof Sono P.S. Case No. 70/1990 was 
instituted. During investigation, P.W.3 victim returned 
home and charge sheet was submitted and after 
taking cognizance case was committed to the court of 
sessions and trial commenced after framing the 
charge for the offence under section 364/149 of the 
Indian Penal Code against four persons, but ultimately 
till the end of the trial only three persons were there, 
out of whom two have been acquitted, but the 
appellant stands convicted and sentenced giving rise 
to this present appeal. 
3.   Since none was turning up to represent 
the appellant earlier vide order dated 18.11.2010, Sri 
Ranbir Singh, Advocate, was appointed as amicus 
curiae, was represented the appellant today. 
4.  In order to substantiate the charges 
prosecution has examined altogether 10 witnesses 
besides producing documentary evidence by way of 
Exhibits. 
Ext. 1         :   Fardbeyan 
Ext. 2         :   Seizure List 
Ext. 3         :   Statement u/s 164 Cr.P.C. 
Ext. 4         :   Requisition 
 
 
4 
Ext. 5 & 5/1: Injury report. 
5.   From the trend of cross examination and 
submissions, it appears that defence has denied the 
allegation and treated false allegation, but neither any 
oral of any documentary evidence has been produced. 
Now, it is to be seen in this appeal whether 
prosecution has been able to substantiate the charges 
against the appellant without any shadow of 
reasonable doubt or finding of the court below needs 
interference. 
6.   From the very fardbeyan of the informant 
P.W.3, it appears that entire occurrence took place 
only in retaliation of demand raised by the informant 
before one Ramzan Mian (co-accused) to pay the 
amount of the articles taken on credit, who instead 
threatened for dire consequences, and during entire 
episode some of the miscreants was to realize Rs. 
50,000/- from the informant just to teach him some 
lesson. 
7.   Narayan Yadav (P.W.1),  has come to 
support the prosecution case arrived at the door of 
informant on alarm where wife of the informant P.W.6 
intimated him that miscreants has taken out her two 
sons and husband and proceeded towards Kadwa 
Pahari. The villagers started proceeding towards the 
 
 
5 
side but found informant and his one son coming and 
informant P.W.2 intimated them about the happenings 
with him, then villagers went to the house of the three 
named accused persons but do not met, roughly two 
hours thereafter again the team with Choukidar and 
Dafadar went to the house of Kolha Mian who escaped 
from there then the group went to the house of the 
appellant Uddin Mian @ Muddin Mian who went in the 
house of another from where he was apprehended and 
subsequently handed over to the police. When the 
police gave him some treatment he disclosed and 
confessed his guilt. In the examination-in-chief this 
witness has changed the sequence and statement of 
informant as stated in the fardbeyan with respect to 
apprehension of the appellant by the villagers. 
Whereas P.W.2 the informant in examination-in-chief 
has almost narrated the statement made in the 
fardbeyan with slight improvement regarding 
explosion of bomb and during way assault by means 
of pistol etc. Nowhere he said that the villagers went to 
the house of either of the three named accused 
persons and in second attempt one Kolha Mian 
escaped from their custody and the appellant was 
apprehended from the house of another. Rather 
according to P.W.2 appellant was apprehended from 
 
 
6 
the way itself. Now, in cross examination this 
informant admits that it was a dark night when 
occurrence took place, though he asserts that light 
was there in his shop but in absence of examination of 
Investigating Officer or any supporting material, his 
version also becomes doubtful. 
8.   In paragraph 22 he says that he was 
dragged by miscreants up to 1 K.M. from his house 
where he and one of his sons was released but 
another was taken with them. This story also becomes 
doubtful, if at all, miscreants had to release the 
informant and his one son and keep another son 
under confinement. This much could have been done 
at the shop itself. Just to release after some threats 
informant and his son aged about 5 years, the two 
could not have been dragged for one K.M. taking risk 
of apprehension. This informant asserts when villagers 
apprehended the appellant Uddin @ Mudin Mian he 
was handed over to the Chowkidar and Dafardar but 
for the reasons best known to the prosecution, none of 
these two also have been examined. 
9.    Ashoke Kumar Burnawal (P.W.3) aged 
12 years at the time of examination has come to 
support prosecution case but enhance the amount of 
demand from 50,000/- to 1,00,000/- and further 
 
 
7 
improves the case that when he accepted to pay Rs. 
15,000/- then his father and younger brother would 
be released. But as security he was taken with the 
miscreants who kept him for about a week and he has 
not complained any ill-treatment. In paragraph 2, he 
says that he was released near Kadwa Pahari and 
while he was returning to his house Officer-in-Charge 
of Sono Police Station met in the way and brought him 
to the police station and during investigation he has 
went to the places where he was kept confined with 
the police and showed such places from where one 
blanket was also recovered. Seizure list was prepared. 
He proved his signature Ext. 2 thereon. Further his 
statement under section 164 of Code of Criminal 
Procedure was recorded and marked as Ext. 3. But no 
police officials has been examined to say about the 
inspection of places or material finding etc. or even 
meeting with this witness in the way who as said was 
released suo motu by the miscreants without any 
payment etc. 
10.   In para 23, this witness says that he 
meet with his father 11 days after the occurrence out 
of which for 6 days he was kept under confinement by 
the miscreants but for 5 days he remained with the 
police. There is none to explain very purpose of such 
 
 
8 
detention of this witness P.W.3 with the police, or even 
to support his assertion. 
11.   Rameshwar Yadav (P.W.4) is a hearsay 
witness. There is nothing worth mentioning in his 
evidence. Dhalo Yadav (P.W.5)  is a witness to say 
what P.W.1 contrary to P.W.2 has said in his 
examination-in-chief. Rekha Devi @ Rakha Kumari 
(P.W.6) is the wife of the informant and mother of 
P.W.3 stated about the occurrence taken place at her 
shop. During cross examination, she admits nothing 
was paid to the miscreants and she has no concern 
with the dealings of her husband at the shop with the 
customers.  
12.   Dr. Chandrika Prasad Mishra (P.W.7) 
Medical Officer, Primary Health Centre, Sono, has 
examined the appellant who sustained some injuries 
and proved the Injury Report Exhibit – 5 and 5/1. 
Injuries are simple in nature. As per prosecution case, 
the appellant sustained some injuries while he was 
apprehended by the villagers with respect to which 
there is two sets of statement one by P.W.2 and 
another by P.W.1 and P.W.4. Ajit Kumar Singh 
(P.W.8), Ghayas Hadi (P.W.9) and Raj Kumar Sinha 
(P.W.10) are formal witnesses respectively proved Ext. 
6 series. 
 
 
9 
13.  As stated above, the witnesses 
examined by the prosecution had stated in consistent 
statements with regard to apprehension of the 
appellant. It is the case of informant P.W.2 that he 
was apprehended from the way, whereas the witnesses 
came to support and states his apprehension from the 
house of another. Wherein in order to escape he took 
shelter after on chase from his own house. No doubt, 
P.W.2 and P.W.3  claimed to identify this appellant as 
one of the participant of the occurrence, but, in fact, 
there is no independent witness out of the family, the 
persons who were at the relevant time purchasing 
some articles from grocery shop of the informant have 
not been examined for no reason besides other 
relevant and important witnesses Chowkidar and 
Dafadar under whose custody the appellant was kept 
confined in whole night after his alleged apprehension. 
That apart Investigating Officer has also not been 
examined. There is no explanation about the 
circumstances compelling the miscreants to release 
victim P.W.3 from their captivity without any pressure 
or fulfillment of their alleged demand, all such creates 
grave doubt against entire prosecution version.  
14.   Thus, on overall consideration of the 
facts and circumstances of the case, I find and hold 
 
 
10 
that prosecution has not been able to remove the 
clouds created against the case and once doubt is not 
removed, the appellant deserves the benefit. I 
appreciate the assistance provided by Mr. Ranbir 
Singh, learned Amicus curiae. Let a copy of the first 
page and last page of this judgment be handed over to 
him so that he may realize his fees from the High 
Court Legal Services Committee, Patna.  
15.     The appeal stands allowed. Order of 
his conviction and sentence is set aside. The appellant 
is on bail after substantial detention, he is set free 
from the liability of the bail bonds furnished on his 
behalf. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Patna High Court 
Date : The 25th March 2011 
Rajeev/N.A.F.R. 
( Akhilesh Chandra, J.) 
 
