Source: AWS Open Data - indian-high-court-judgments/data/pdf/year=1993/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010179591992_1_2014-08-27.pdf
Ref: data/pdf/year=1993/court=10_8/bench=patnahcucisdb94/BRHC010179591992_1_2014-08-27.pdf

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA 
Govt. Appeal (DB) No.16 of 1992 
 Arising out of PS.Case No.-127 Year-1985 Thana-Sikandra District- MUNGER 
=========================================================== 
The State of Bihar 
....   ....    Appellant 
Versus 
1. Vijay Singh @ Vijay Kr. Sharma. 
2. Tanik Singh @ Awadh Kishore Prasad Singh. 
Both residents of village Lohanda (Lohna), P.S. Sikandra, District Munger 
(Jamui). 
....   ....  Respondents 
with 
=========================================================== 
Criminal Appeal (DB) No. 219 of  1992 
Arising out of PS.Case No.-127 Year-1985 Thana-Sikandra District- MUNGER 
=========================================================== 
1. Krishnandan Singh. 
2. Rajnandan Singh. 
3. Ramnandan Singh. 
All sons of Late Bindeshwari Singh. 
All residents of village Lohanda, P.S. Sikandra, District Jamui. 
4. Bhagwan Singh @ Bhagwan Prasad Sharma, son of Late Lala Prasad, resident 
of village Tulsigarh, P.S. Chandi, District Nalanda. 
 
....   ....    Appellants 
Versus 
The State of Bihar 
....   ....  Respondent 
with 
=========================================================== 
Criminal Appeal (DB) No. 271 of  1992 
Arising out of PS.Case No.-127 Year-1985 Thana-Sikandra District- MUNGER 
=========================================================== 
Shyamnandan Singh, son of Late Chhotelal Singh, resident of village Lohanda, P.S. 
Sikandra, District Jamui. 
....   ....    Appellant 
Versus 
The State of Bihar 
....   ....  Respondent 
=========================================================== 
Appearance: 
Govt. Appeal (DB) No. 16 of 1992 
For the Appellant : Sri Dilip Kumar Sinha, APP 
For the Respondents : Sri Akhileshwar Prasad Singh, Sr. Advocate 
     Sri Sanjiv Kumar Singh, Advocate 
Cr. Appeal (DB) No. 219 of 1992 with Cr. Appeal (DB) No. 271 of 1992 
For the Appellants : Sri Naresh Dikshit, Advocate 
     Sri Kunal Tiwary, Advocate 
For the State  : Sri Dilip Kumar Sinha, APP 
     Sri Abhimanyu Sharma, APP 
For the Informant : Sri Ajay Kumar Thakur, Advocate 
     Sri Ravi Kumar, Advocate 
=========================================================== 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 2 / 38 
 
2 
CORAM: HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE DHARNIDHAR JHA 
and 
HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE AMARESH KUMAR LAL 
C.A.V. JUDGMENT 
(Per: HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE DHARNIDHAR JHA) 
Date: 26-03-2015 
 
 Seven accused persons were put on trial by the learned 
Sessions Judge in Sessions Case No. 65 of 1986 by being charged 
under Sections 323, 302, 364, 449, 450, 380/34 and 120B of the 
Indian Penal Code.  Accused Vijoy Singh @ Vijoy Kumar Sharma 
and Tanik Singh @ Awadh Kishore Prasad Singh had distinctly 
been charged under Sections 342/34 of the Indian Penal Code.  The 
judgment in the case was delivered by the learned 12 th Additional 
Sessions Judge, Munger on 05.06.1992 by which two accused, 
namely, Vijoy Singh @ Vijoy Kumar Sharma and Tanik Singh @ 
Awadh Kishore Prasad Singh were acquitted of all the charges, 
five other accused persons who are the appellants in the two 
criminal appeals, namely, Krishna Nandan Singh, Raj Nandan 
Singh, Ram Nandan Singh, Shyam Nandan Singh and Bhagwan 
Singh @ Bhagwan Prasad Sharma were convicted of committing 
offences under Sections 364/34 and 302/34 of the Indian Penal 
Code and thus, they were also acquitted of charges under Sections 
449, 450, 380, 323 and 120B of the Indian Penal Code.  The five 
appellants, named above, who had been convicted under Sections 
364/34 and 302/34 of the Indian Penal Code were heard on 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 3 / 38 
 
3 
sentence and each of them was directed to suffer rigorous 
imprisonment for life under each of the two counts, the sentences 
being directed to run concurrently.  Those five appellants have 
preferred the two criminal appeals against their conviction and 
sentence imposed upon them.  While the State of Bihar has 
preferred a separate appeal for challenging the acquittal of Vijoy 
Singh @ Vijoy Kumar Sharma and Tanik Singh @ Awadh Kishore 
Prasad Singh.  These appeals thus, arising out of the same 
judgment, have been heard together and are being disposed of by 
this common judgment. 
2. Neelam, the deceased, was married to Ashok Kumar 
Singh who happened to be the son of Ganesh Prasad Singh (P.W.3) 
and brother of Ramanand Singh (P.W.18) the informant of the 
case.  The informant stated that Neelam, her husband Ashok 
Kumar Singh and the informant the elder brother of her husband 
were residing in the house of her father situated at Simultala which 
belonged to late Jang Bahadur Singh the father of Neelam.  It was 
stated that while the informant, the deceased and her husband were 
residing in some part of the house, some other parts of it had been 
let out to tenants who were also in occupation of their tenanted 
portion. 
It was stated by the informant that on the 30 th of August, 
1985 at about 10 p.m. he was sitting on the rickshaw of one 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 4 / 38 
 
4 
Doman Tanti (not examined) and was talking to the said Doman 
Tanti, Daso Mistri and a blind man deceased Neelam, at that time 
was sleeping inside the house and her husband Ashok Kumar 
Singh had gone to his native place Ghonghasa.  All on a sudden the 
seven accused persons, named in the First Information Report, 
which included the five appellants of the two criminal appeals and 
the two respondents of the government appeal came there along 
with 15 unknown persons from north.  As soon as the accused 
persons had arrived, respondent Vijoy Singh @ Vijoy Kumar 
Sharma is said to have pulled down the informant (P.W.18) from 
the rickshaw over which he was sitting.  At that time Vijoy Singh 
@ Vijoy Kumar Sharma was accompanied by 2-3 unknown 
persons of Lohanda.  The informant raised alarms shouting as to 
why they were committing such highhandedness upon which two 
unknown persons pointed pistols towards him and commanded him 
to keep silent, else, he will be shot dead.  Those accused persons 
caught the informant, assaulted him with fists and slaps and took 
him towards the north side of the house near a well and kept him 
confined there.  In the meantime, appellant Krishna Nandan Singh 
got the doors of the entry of the house unlatched through Kumud 
Ranjan Singh (not examined) and entered inside it with 5-7 persons 
and dragged Neelam out of the house.  While dragging Neelam out 
of the room, the accused persons also picked up her two Sarees 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 5 / 38 
 
5 
with two blouses and two petticoats besides a pair of her slippers.  
After Neelam had been brought out, four persons lifted Neelam by 
catching her legs and hands and started moving towards Lohanda.  
The informant raised alarms as a result of which people of the 
mohalla as also his uncle Chandra Shekhar Prasad Singh (P.W.4), 
Vinay Kumar Singh @ Ganauri Singh (P.W.2) and Ram Naresh 
Singh (P.W.5) came to the place of occurrence and saw and 
identified the accused persons.  Those witnesses also told the 
accused persons as to why they had committed such an act but the 
accused persons did not give Neelam up and took her towards 
north.  The informant stated that no one dared follow the accused 
persons on account of frighten by the pistols they had been 
carrying and further that besides being identified the accused who 
had been named by him in the First Information Report he could 
identify those also who participated in commission of the offence. 
3. The motive for commission of the offence, as per the 
informant, was that let Jang Bahadur Singh who happened to be 
the father of Neelam had no son and his house which was situated 
at Simultala was in possession of his elder daughter Neelam.  In 
order to divesting Neelam of the house and the other immovable 
properties of her father, the accused persons had committed her 
abduction in order to killing her.  It was further stated that some 
litigation was pending in between the wife of late Jang Bahadur 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 6 / 38 
 
6 
Singh and his other co-sharers. 
4. The First Information Report of the case (Ext.16) was 
drawn up at the statement of Rama Nand Singh (P.W.18) the 
informant of the case by Uday Kant Pathak (P.W.21) who was the 
Officer-in-Charge of Sikandara police station which had the 
jurisdiction over the place of occurrence.  At the time of lodging 
the First Information Report, as may appear from the very 
document as also from the very first line of the evidence of 
P.W.21, P.W.18 was accompanied by Vinay Kumar Singh @ 
Ganauri Singh (P.W.2) and Chandra Shekhar Prasad Singh (P.W.4) 
as also by Ram Naresh Singh (P.W.5) out of whom Vinay Kumar 
Singh @ Ganauri Singh (P.W.2) and Chandra Shekhar Prasad 
Singh (P.W.4) had signed the document as witnesses to the fact 
that the report had been lodged in their presence.  P.W.21 
thereafter took up the investigation of the case and came to the 
place of occurrence at 11.20 p.m.  He made search for Neelam but 
could not find trace her house.  He thereafter went to the village of 
accused persons at Lohanda and reached there at 11.30 p.m. and 
again searched for the lady Neelam but without any success.  He 
searched for the accused persons also searched their houses but 
could not find anything on search of their houses nor could he find 
any of the accused persons.  The search memo has been marked 
‘A’ for identification.  The Investigating Officer again came to 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 7 / 38 
 
7 
Simultala at 1 a.m. and recorded the statements of Chandra 
Shekhar Prasad Singh (P.W.4), Vinay Kumar Singh @ Ganauri 
Singh (P.W.2), Ram Naresh Singh, Kumud Ranjan Singh (not 
examined) and Chando Devi (also not examined).  He thereafter 
inspected the place of occurrence which was a house facing west 
situated east of the macadamized road.  There was a room situated 
in front of the house and there were four other houses located on 
the Verandah of the house.  There was a passage which was 
leading to the courtyard of the house in the eastern and that 
passage was located north of the southern room.  The building was 
two parts from inside.  One part of the house was accessible by the 
above noted lane but the southern part of it was accessible by 
another lane situated in the southern part of the house and to the 
west of that passage was situated a room which was interconnected 
with another room.  There were two interconnected rooms and 
there was no exit towards the courtyard or on the outer side of the 
house.  There were other two rooms which were on the south of the 
passage and those rooms opened in the passage and the rooms 
which were opening into the passage, in one of them the 
Investigating Officer found a Chowki, a cot, a rack fixed in the 
wall with some books, one Algani (a wooden of bamboo structure 
meant for hanging clothes) in which, as per the Investigating 
Officer, was residing Neelam the deceased.  In the same room the 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 8 / 38 
 
8 
Investigating Officer found a Khadi Chadar kept in a Jhola and 
some make-up articles.  There was a rope fixed in the passage 
which was also used for putting clothes on it and he found some 
clothes hanging by it.  To the east of the passage was another room 
facing north and in that room also, the Investigating Officer found 
a cot, bed, books, boxes etc.  There was another room in the 
Aangan which was facing east and it was being used as the kitchen 
and he found fuel materials kept inside it.  The lavatory was 
situated on the north-eastern corner of the courtyard.  The southern 
most room which was located on the Verandah of the house and 
which was facing west was, as per the evidence of P.W.21, in 
occupation of the Block Education Extension Officer who was a 
tenant of the house whose office was being run in the two 
interconnected room situated north of the passage and signboard to 
that effect was also hanging there.  Some records of the office of 
the Block Education Extension Officer was also there whereas in 
the northern most room located on the Verandah, the Investigating 
Officer found some bags of cement stored there.  Fallow land was 
towards the north of the house whereas a well was located on the 
south-eastern corner of the house.  Another well was also located 
on the north-eastern corner in the fallow land.  The house was 
surrounded by house of other persons on all its sides. 
5. The Investigating Officer stated that while he was still 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 9 / 38 
 
9 
in the process of inspecting the place of occurrence, he received an 
information at 7.45 a.m. that the dead body of Neelam was lying in 
a field situated west of the road which was in front of the house 
and as such he went there and found the dead body at 8 a.m.  He 
held inquest upon the dead body and prepared the inquest report 
(Ext.2) in presence of witnesses, namely, Chandra Shekhar Prasad 
Singh (P.W.4) and Nand Kishore Singh (P.W.1).  The field where 
the dead body was found was situated at a distance of 1000 yards 
north of the place of occurrence house of Jang Bahadur Singh and 
was at a distance of about 400 yards in the west of the road running 
in between Lakhisarai and Sikandara.  The dead body was found 
lying 10 feet north of the southern ridge and 2 feet east of the 
western road.  Paddy plants were standing there and water was 
available in the field here and there.  The standing paddy crop was 
found trampled and the blood was mixed with water which was 
found by the Investigating Officer.  The house of the accused 
persons was at a distance of about 1½ k.m. from that field and 
village Achmiyo (sic) was located at a distance of about 1 k.m. to 
the west of the field and Sikandara Block Development Office was 
at a distance of about 1/2 k.m. straight way from the field.  To the 
south of the field in which the dead body was fond was located 
another field of one Lalo Yadav and the Investigating Officer 
found on the northern ridge of that field a petticoat, two blouses, 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 10 / 38 
 
10 
one chester (brassier) and two Sarees and he seized those articles 
in presence of the witnesses, above named, by preparing seizure 
memo (Ext.5). 
6. P.W.1 found the dead body lying by its back and the 
head was tilted towards right, the eyes were half open and the left 
hand of the deceased was bent towards the head while her right 
hand was under her body.  Her left leg was placed at her right leg 
and her right hand was crashed and a paddy plant was in the grasp 
of that right hand in the right palm.  The throat was slit in its front 
and only blouse was over her body and the lower part of her body 
was naked except that a red coloured Saree had been placed at the 
private part of the dead body.  The lock of hair had been band into 
with the help of a ribbon and there was a ring like ornament in her 
nose and a gold ring was placed in one of her fingers of her right 
hand.  The Investigating Officer requisitioned P.W.9 Dayanand 
Mishra to take the photograph of the deceased and that photograph 
was marked by the learned trial Judge as Ext.9 and that is available 
on the lower court records with the exhibited documents which 
indicates that the description of the dead body is fully true. 
The Investigating Officer sent the dead body by 
preparing the dead body challan for post-mortem examination 
through Constable 707, Ram Bilash Mandal.  The Investigating 
Officer thereafter recorded the statements of witnesses, obtained 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 11 / 38 
 
11 
the post-mortem report and the copy of the photograph and took 
steps for enforcing the appearance of the accused persons.  After 
receiving the post-mortem examination report, the Investigating 
Officer made an enquiry from the doctor through Ext.17 as to 
whether the deceased had been raped and the Deputy 
Superintendent of Sub-divisional Hospital, Jamui through Ext.18 
pointed out that there was no evidence of rape committed on the 
dead body.  The Investigating Officer after recording the 
statements of witnesses and finding material sufficient sent the five 
appellants and the two respondents up for their trial which resulted 
in the impugned judgment. 
7. The defence of the appellants was many folds.  It was 
suggested that they did not commit an offence alleged and they had 
been roped in on account of the admitted enmities and litigation.  
They appeared also challenging that Jang Bahadur Singh was not 
married to Premlata @ Prabhawati the sister of P.W.7 Rajendra 
Prasad Singh  rather he was married to a different lady and further 
that Neelam the deceased was not the daughter of late Jang 
Bahadur Singh from the said Premlata @ Prabhawati. 
8. In support of the charges, the prosecution examined as 
many as 27 witnesses out of whom Nand Kishore Singh (P.W.1) 
was a witness to the inquest as also to the seizure of the clothes 
which were found lying near the dead body.  Vinay Kumar Singh 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 12 / 38 
 
12 
@ Ganauri Singh (P.W.2) was an eye-witness to the whole 
occurrence with Chandra Shekhar Prasad Singh (P.W.4) and Ram 
Naresh Singh (P.W.5) who had supported P.W.18 Ramanand 
Singh the informant of the case.  Ganesh Prasad Singh (P.W.3) the 
father of the informant and the father-in-law of deceased Neelam, 
as per his evidence, who gave statement inter alia on the fact that 
Neelam was married to his second son Ashok Kumar Singh and 
that she was residing in the house and after learning about the 
incident, he rushed to Simultala and requested the police to take 
necessary steps for tracing out Neelam but the police was 
indifferent towards his request and further that the dead body of 
Neelam was found in the paddy field and the scene was extremely 
painful.  P.W.6 Suresh Prasad Singh was a teacher who had given 
evidence on the fact that Neelam was residing in the house in 
question which originally belonged to her father late Jang Bahadur 
Singh and further that he knew Neelam because late Jang Bahadur 
Singh had been his colleague and he used to go to the house in 
question because Ram Chhabila Singh the Block Education 
Extension Officer was a tenant in that house.  Rajendra Prasad 
Singh (P.W.7) was the maternal uncle of the deceased Neelam and 
he gave evidence on the motive part of the occurrence as also on 
the fact that Neelam was residing in the house with her husband 
and the informant and that P.W.7 was also residing there in order 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 13 / 38 
 
13 
to extending protection to Neelam who had the threat over life.  
Baleshwar Prasad Singh (P.W.8) was a witness of formal character 
who produced the school admission register and this Court could 
not understand as to what was the purpose in producing the school 
admission register as the evidence of P.W.8 did not appear 
necessary for proof of the charges.  Dayanand Mishra (P.W.9), it 
has already been noted, the photographer who was hired by 
P.W.21 the Investigating Officer to take photograph of the dead 
body which photograph had been marked Ext.9 on behalf of the 
prosecution.  P.W.10 Ashok Kumar Choudhary was a witness who 
went to the place of occurrence after knowing about the occurrence 
while Brahmdeo Singh (P.W.11) gave statement that he had acted 
as a mediator to negotiate the marriage of Neelam to Ashok Kumar 
Singh while Umesh Singh (P.W.12) also gave statement on the 
same fact, like, Ashok Kumar Choudhary (P.W.10) that he also 
went to the place of occurrence after learning about the occurrence.  
Satya Narain Singh (P.W.13) had held post-mortem examination 
on the dead body of Neelam while Ram Balak Singh (P.W.14), 
Ram Bilash Singh (P.W.15) had given evidence that they had 
participated in the marriage of Neelam and had identified their 
photographs from the group photographs which had also been 
brought on record as Exts. 12 series.  Kapildeo Singh (P.W.16) had 
given evidence on the marriage of Premlata @ Prabhawati the 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 14 / 38 
 
14 
mother of Neelam to let Jang Bahadur Singh and had stated that 
after the death of Jang Bahadur Singh, Premlata @ Prabhawati was 
residing at the residence of P.W.7 Rajendra Prasad Singh.  
Kameshwar Thakur (P.W.17) was the Pandit who had performed 
the marriage of Neelam with Ashok Kumar Singh.  P.W.19 
Constable Ram Vilash Mandal had taken the dead body for post-
mortem examination while P.W.20 Satya Narain Singh had given 
evidence on the marriage of Jang Bahadur Singh and Neelam his 
daughter.  Anhach Singh (P.W.22) also gave statement on the 
marriage of Neelam and Kiran Kumari (P.W.23) the younger sister 
of Neelam who had given evidence not only on the marriage of 
Neelam, has also stated that Neelam was residing in the house and 
she has overheard the appellants’ plan to murder Neelam.  Vinod 
Kumar (P.W.24) was a witness of formal character who had given 
evidence that the document which was requisitioned by the learned 
trial Court was searched by him and the document was produced 
before the trial court by him.  P.W.25 Bhuneshwar Prasad had 
produced the nomination papers on the requisition of the trial court 
from the office of the District Superintendent of Education where 
he was posted as an Assistant.  P.W.26 Ranvijay Singh was also a 
witness of formal character who had produced the Vakalatnama 
filed by advocates of this Court in Civil Revision No. 575 of 1988 
which was preferred before this Court.  P.W.27 Damodar Singh 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 15 / 38 
 
15 
was again a witness of formal character who had produced the 
copy of the bail order. 
It may be pertinent to point out at this very place itself 
that the evidence of P.Ws. 24 to 27 was of no consequence as 
regards the proof of the charges. 
9. The defence also examined seven witnesses.  D.W.1 
Anirudh Singh had proved two Kewalas which were executed in 
favour of late Jang Bahadur Singh and Chhote Lal Singh.  This 
Court again could not find out the relevance of production of these 
two Kewalas.  D.W.2 Madan Mohan Gupta also produced and we 
could not even find out from the whole bunch of prosecution 
evidence as to what was the basis in context to which D.W.2 was 
examined and had produced the Kewalas.  D.W.3 Ashok Kumar 
Singh was the Deputy Superintendent of Police in Jamui and has 
supervised the case whereas D.W.4 D.N. Gautam was the 
Superintendent of Police, Munger and who had also supervised the 
case.  D.W.5 Gajadhar Singh was examined to say that the office 
of Sri Krishna Mahavidyalaya, Lohanda of which institution, he 
was a treasurer was located in the house of Chhote Lal Singh.  
D.W.6 Dasarath Prasad Singh was a teacher in the Primary School, 
Naungarh and he had produced a certificate which was in the 
handwriting of one Ram Bilash Singh the School Sub-Inspector.  
This Court again failed to appreciate as to what was the purpose of 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 16 / 38 
 
16 
examining D.W.6 and producing the certificate.  D.W.7 Fauzdari 
Singh was the father-in-law of appellant Shyam Nandan Singh and 
he had given evidence on alibi of that appellant by stating that on 
the day of occurrence appellant Shyam Nandan Singh was at 
Barahiya with his family. 
10. Shri Naresh Dixit, advocate has appeared on behalf of 
the appellants in two appeals while Shri Ajay Kumar Thakur, 
advocate appeared on behalf of the informant in the batch of 
appeals.  The State was represented by Shri D.K. Sinha, the 
learned Additional Public Prosecutor and the two respondents in 
the government appeal have been represented by Shri Akhileshwar 
Singh, the learned Senior Advocate. 
11. Shri Naresh Dixit took us through the evidence of 
four of the witnesses only and he did not refer to any evidence and 
submitted that evidence of four witnesses was not reliable.  It was 
contended that the tenant, like, Ram Chhabila Singh or his son, 
namely, Smt. Chando Devi from whom the witnesses, like, P.W. 7 
and others had learnt about the incident did not come to support the 
allegations as it was contended that the house was surrounded by 
many houses and none of the residents of those house also came to 
support the prosecution case.  Contention was that P.W.5 Ram 
Naresh Singh had admitted that he was coming from Deoghar and 
his house was located in between Lakhisarai and Simultala and 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 17 / 38 
 
17 
there was no reason shown by him as to why he had not gone to his 
village and had travelled ahead of his village up to Simultala.  It 
was contended that the only purpose of P.W.5 in making that 
statement was to project himself as a eye-witness to the 
occurrence.  It was contended by Shri Dixit that it was an 
imaginary story and Neelam had never lived in the house and as 
such, there could not be any question that she be abducted and 
killed. 
12. Shri D.K. Sinha also took us through the relevant 
parts of the evidence and finding recorded by the learned judge 
while acquitting respondents Vijoy Singh @ Vijoy Kumar Sharma 
and Tanik Singh @ Awadh Kishore Prasad Singh and submitted 
that the finding of the learned trial judge that Tanik Singh @ 
Awadh Kishore Prasad Singh was not named in the First 
Information Report was made against the record, i.e., the First 
Information Report which simply indicates that he was very well 
named in it.  Shri Sinha took us through the evidence of four 
witnesses and pointed out that there are evidence of three witnesses 
indicating their participation and as such, their acquittal was 
against the weight of evidence and thus was perverse. 
13. Shri Akhileshwar Singh appearing for the two 
respondents submitted that the charges had not been proved against 
the two respondents of the government appeal and they had rightly 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 18 / 38 
 
18 
been acquitted. 
14. As against the above submissions, Shri Ajay Kumar 
Thakur appearing for the informant took us to the relevant records 
indicating that a Will letters of administration was granted in their 
favour by the appellants and a probate of the Will as regards the 
letters of administration was also obtained from the Court bala 
bala against which order of probate, the deceased Neelam, her 
maternal grandfather as guardian of her mother and her two minor 
sisters had filed the First Appeal No. 764 of 1979 before this Court 
in which the Court had passed an order of injunction restraining 
the respondents in that First Appeal who are the appellants before 
this Court from alienating any part of the property and further 
restrained the execution of the probate of the Will as regards the 
letters of administration by restraining the delivery of possession to 
the respondents.  The matter was remanded by this Court when the 
appellants in the above noted appeal had expressed their desire of 
filing the revocation petition seeking the revocation of the order 
probating the Will and when in fact such an application was filed 
before the District Judge, while passing an order on 04.09.1981, a 
Division Bench of this Court had continued the order restraining 
the respondents in the First Appeal from disposing of any property 
belonging to the testator without permission of the District Judge.  
It was further contended by Shri Thakur that Neelam was fighting 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 19 / 38 
 
19 
tooth and nail to get the order of revocation as regards the letters of 
administration which was forged and fabricated and on that count 
the appellants had been restrained either to take possession or to 
dispose of the properties and that has caused serious difficulties for 
them and that was the reason that Neelam was picked and 
butchered.  Submission was that the evidence on motive was both 
documentary and oral, as appears from the evidence of P.W.7 
Rajendra Prasad Singh who was the maternal uncle of deceased 
Neelam.  The evidence indicated that Neelam was residing in the 
house so that the appellants could not take possession of it and she 
was accompanied in her attempt of holding over the property by 
her husband, the elder brother of her husband and her maternal 
uncle P.W.7.  The evidence of four witnesses give details of the 
occurrence and the manner in which the offence was committed 
and the circumstances attending subsequently on the commission 
of the offence which indicated that it were the appellants and the 
two respondents who had participated in commission of the 
offence.  Submission was that the conviction of the appellants was 
proper and the two respondents of the government appeal were 
also required to be convicted. 
15. The issues arising out of the arguments of the parties, 
just noticed by me, are two fold.  The first question which requires 
to be answered is as to whether the accused persons had the 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 20 / 38 
 
20 
requisite motive for eliminating Neelam, the deceased, as she was 
felt a thorn in their flesh due to the fact that she had waged a war 
sort of thing by taking the litigation up to this Court against the 
grant of letters of administration in favour of the appellants and 
had ultimately succeeded in obtaining certain orders restraining the 
appellants from alienating any part of the property and on the 
delivery of possession to them over the property if the same had 
not been delivered to them.  The other question is as to whether 
Neelam was indeed residing in the house in question and whether 
she had been taken away by the accused persons as alleged by the 
prosecution.  As regards the killing of Neelam it is no longer an 
issue after finding of her dead body and the manner in which it was 
left after killing Neelam.  It is indicated that she was killed and 
further that she had put some serious hurdles in the attempts of her 
killers in respect of their design in achieving their goal. 
As regards the motive, this fact is admitted that the house 
situated in Simultala which had been described by P.W.21 as the 
place of occurrence and which had been described in vivid details 
by the Investigating Officer was undisputedly belonging to late 
Jang Bahadur Singh and in spite of an attempt by the defence that 
Neelam was not the daughter of Jang Bahadur Singh, it appears 
established beyond doubt that she was one of the three daughters 
of late Jang Bahadur Singh.  It does not appear any longer in 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 21 / 38 
 
21 
question that a Will was brought into existence and on that basis 
Letters of Administration Case No. 2 of 1979 was filed before the 
District Judge, Munger.  It also appears undisputed that by 
judgment dated 27.06.1979, the letters of administration was 
granted in favour of the present set of appellants and a few others 
which may be apparent from the connected memo of appeal which 
was filed before this Court upon which First Appeal No. 764 of 
1979 was registered.  The Division Bench of this Court had passed 
three different orders on three different dates after filing of the first 
appeal which was brought by Premlata the mother of Neelam, 
Neelam Kumari daughter of Jang Bahadur Singh and her two 
minor sisters, namely, Rekha Kumari (not examined) and Kiran 
Kumari (P.W.23), who with their mentally retarded mother, were 
under the guardianship of their maternal grand father (Nana) 
Ramswaroop Singh.  Out of the three orders of the Court passed on 
23.01.1981, 02.03.1981 and 04.05.1981 which have been marked 
Ext.33, the first order indicates that as soon as the respondents no. 
1 to 5, i.e., the appellants had appeared before this Court, it was 
directed by this Court that if the possession had not been delivered 
to the respondents (i.e., the present appellants) then the same was 
not to be delivered to them till the disposal of the stay petition.  
The second part of that order was that money lying in the bank or 
in the postal savings account, which had not been withdrawn, must 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 22 / 38 
 
22 
also not be withdrawn until the disposal of the stay petition.  It 
appears from order dated 02.03.1981 that the counsel for the 
appellants, i.e., Neelam, her mother and her two sisters, informed 
this Court that they were desirous of filing an application seeking 
the revocation of order granting letters of administration to the 
present set of appellants and the permission was granted by this 
Court. The last order dated 04.05.1981 was passed issuing certain 
directions to the District Judge, Munger as also to the parties to the 
suit in the light of the fact that the revocation application had been 
filed before the District Judge, Munger.  It was, firstly, ordered that 
the respondents (i.e., the present appellants) were restrained from 
disposing of the properties on the basis of the letters of 
administration and further no property belonging to the testator 
was to be disposed of without the permission of the District Judge.  
Thus, what appears from the above orders passed by this Court in 
First Appeal No. 764 of 1979, is that in spite of having obtained an 
order granting letters of administration to them, the appellants had 
virtually been deprived of the benefits of that order when this 
Court had passed the orders restraining them to get the possession 
of properties covered by it or to sell any property or part thereof.  
Thus the attempt and efforts both of the appellants in getting the 
properties of Late Jang Bahadur Singh with the house in question, 
had received serious set back and they had been pushed to such a 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 23 / 38 
 
23 
brink that they were to toil in the court of the District Judge, 
Munger to get an order permitting them to administer the 
properties of Jang Bahadur Singh. 
The question which was mooted before this Court during 
the argument of the present case was as to whether Neelam was 
residing on the relevant day in the said house.  On the above point, 
there are a number of witnesses who came forward to state that not 
only Neelam but others, like, P.W.7 Rajendra Prasad Singh, her 
maternal uncle (Mama) and P.W.18 Ramanand Singh, the elder 
brother of her husband, were also residing in some part of the 
house with her.  It is true that some of the other occupants of the 
house, like, Ram Chhabila Singh or his son, namely, Kumud 
Ranjan Singh besides his sister, namely, Chando Devi who were 
residing in the house as tenants did not come to support the above 
fact that Neelam or P.W.18 the informant or P.W.7 the maternal 
uncle of deceased were residing in that particular house, but while 
we were being taken through the evidence of witnesses we found 
that the evidence was satisfactory and convincing that Neelam was 
residing in the house.  P.W.21 the Investigating Officer had 
inspected the house and he had gone into every nook and corner of 
the premises.  He had found two rooms which had their exit in the 
passage of the house and he had found that the one, which was 
situated towards south, had a chowki kept in it with one cot and a 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 24 / 38 
 
24 
rack was fixed in the wall with some books.  There was an Alagani 
over which some clothes were also kept.  It was pointed out to 
P.W.21 that it was the room which was in occupation of Neelam 
and P.W.21 had also found that besides a Khadi Chadar(wrapper 
of Khadi) which was kept into a cloth bag, some make-up 
materials or articles were also there in the bag.  P.W.21 further 
found that there was yet another Alagani of rope which had been 
fixed in the wall of the passage and some clothes were also found 
placed over it.  I am not concerned about other articles, like, 
clothes or Chadar or the cot and Chowki.  One evidence which 
appears suggesting that some lady was residing in that house was 
that some make-up articles were found kept in the cloth bag.  In 
addition to this evidence, I find that the witnesses, like, P.W.2 
Vinay Kumar Singh @ Ganauri Singh, P.W.3 Ganesh Prasad 
Singh, who happened to be the father-in-law of the deceased, 
P.W.4 Chandra Shekhar Prasad Singh and P.W.5 Ram Naresh 
Singh have all stated that Neelam Devi was residing in that house.  
P.W.6 Suresh Prasad Singh, though stated that he never made any 
statement to the police, but considering that P.W.6 had not made 
any statement on the details of occurrence, specially the manner 
thereof as to how Neelam Devi was dragged out of the house and 
was taken away his not having made statement to the police, to me 
appears not that consequential.  This witness had simply stated that 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 25 / 38 
 
25 
he had the occasion of going into the house because Ram Chhabila 
Singh, the Block Education Extension Officer, was living in that 
house as a tenant and he often used to go on account of being a 
teacher whose superior officer was the said Ram Chhabila Singh.  
In addition to the above, P.W.6 had given further reasons that he 
and late Jang Bahadur Singh were colleagues on account of both 
being teachers and on that account also he knew Neelam and 
whenever he went inside the house, he found Neelam there.  P.W.7 
Rajendra Prasad Singh has claimed that he had resided in the house 
and it appears that his evidence as regards the prosecution story 
that Neelam was residing there in the house appears acceptable.  
P.W.23 Kiran Kumari, the sister of Neelam and P.W.3 Ganesh 
Prasad Singh also gave evidence that Neelam was residing in that 
particular house.  These are some of the evidences which have 
been adduced by the prosecution to indicate that Neelam was 
residing in that house. 
P.W.7 Rajendra Prasad Singh the Mama of Neelam had 
stated that he was residing there with the informant and the 
husband of Neelam, because Neelam had some threat perceptions 
emanating from the accused persons.  He had been cross-examined 
as to whether he had filed any application before the authorities 
and the witness had stated that he had sent applications to different 
authorities in respect of the threat which Neelam was getting from 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 26 / 38 
 
26 
the accused persons.  It is true that P.W.7 had not produced any 
telegram which he had claimed to have sent to different police 
officers, as may appear from paragraph 11 of his evidence, and it is 
also true that he had not produced the copy of the other telegrams 
which he claimed to have transmitted to the Superintendent of 
Police and the Officer-in-Charge of the police station and further, 
he had also admitted that he had not shown those documents to the 
police, he has of course, stated that he had sent letters to different 
authorities and some of them were still with him.  In proof of his 
claim that he had sent some letters and some of them were still 
with him, P.W.7 had produced before the court below Ext.31 
which was a letter signed by deceased Neelam, daughter of late 
Jang Bahadur Singh of Village-Lohanda, P.S. Sikandara, District 
Munger.  It was addressed to Shri D.N. Gautam, the 
Superintendent of Police, Munger (D.W.4) and, as may appear 
from the very headings of that letter, it had been sent by Rajendra 
Prasad Singh, P.W.7.  Many matters have been stated in this long 
letter which is spread over seven pages, but what appears relevant 
for the present discussion is the statements which have been made 
by Neelam at page 7 of the letter and that was plain statement 
pointing out that she was apprehending danger to her life from the 
present set of appellants.  Thus, the evidence of witnesses appear 
carrying a ring of truth and as such, inspire my confidence as 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 27 / 38 
 
27 
regards the fact that Neelam was residing in the house and the 
purpose of occupying the house was not to allow the accused 
persons to get into the possession of it.  This, besides being the 
evidence as regards the question as to whether Neelam was 
residing in the house, also appears to me evidence of the fact that 
in spite of having got the letters of administration granted, the 
appellants had been frustrated by three orders passed by this Court 
in the first appeal filed by Neelam, her mother and sister and they 
must have felt further frustrated by the fact that Neelam pitched 
her tent as regards the possession over the house, into it.  These are 
some of the evidences which were appealing to me on the dual 
questions of motive for committing the offence as also for 
answering the question as to whether Neelam was residing in the 
house.  I find that the appellants had a very strong motive as they 
were finding Neelam as the biggest hurdle, who had waged a 
solitary war upon them and had shown courage to keep the house 
in her occupation and not to leave it at any cost and at any 
moment. 
16. The other question which was raised by the learned 
counsel appearing for the appellants was that the occurrence had 
taken place in the dead of night at about 10 p.m. and, as appears 
from the evidence of witnesses, many persons of the surrounding 
houses had emerged from their houses, hearing the cries of 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 28 / 38 
 
28 
informant and others, but they did not come to support the 
prosecution case.  It was also submitted that Kumud Ranjan Singh 
who was the son of Ram Chhabila Singh, one of the tenants of the 
house, had also not come to support with the sister of Ram 
Chhabila Singh, namely, Chando Devi.  I want to point out that it 
appears from the evidence that the accused persons were enjoying 
a very high clot in the locality.  P.W.23 Kiran Kumari, who 
happened to be the sister of deceased Neelam, while being 
examined in trial was asked to identify the accused persons in doc 
and, as may appear from paragraph-8 of her deposition, she was 
not looking at the accused persons.  She subsequently identified 
them, but she started weeping which demeanour of the witness was 
recorded by the learned judge.  The learned judge also recorded 
that the facial index of P.W.23 Kiran Kumari definitely indicated 
that she was frightened and she had deposed before the court in a 
very low voice and in a subdued manner.  Kiran Kumari had stated 
to the court in her evidence that she could not see at the accused 
persons and the recording of this demeanour of the witness clearly 
supports my observation that the accused persons were wielding 
serious clot in the society and no one could dare coming forward to 
depose against them.  In addition to the above fact, which appears 
from the evidence of witnesses, what is recognized by now is that 
there is a general trend in the society that people treat criminal 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 29 / 38 
 
29 
offences as personal matters between the offender and the victim 
and they simply do not come forward to support a story in respect 
of commission of a crime.  It is unfortunate, but it is the truth 
presently prevailing in the society.  In that view, the argument that 
other persons of the neighbourhood did not come to support the 
charges, to me, appears of no substance. 
17. So far as the evidence of four eye-witnesses is 
concerned, P.W.2 Vinay Kumar Singh @ Ganauri Singh, P.W.4 
Chandra Shekhar Prasad Singh and P.W.5 Ram Naresh Singh have 
come forward to support the informant.  While making 
submissions, the learned counsel appearing for the appellants had 
criticized the claim of P.W.5 of being a witness on the ground that 
he had admitted in his evidence in paragraph 11 at page 89 of the 
paper-book that his house was located at a place which was in 
between Lakhisarai and Simultala and he was coming from 
Deoghar and was to go to his house.  There is no dispute in it that 
for going to Simultala, one would have to go to Lakhisarai and 
then to Simultala.  If P.W.5 Ram Naresh Singh who was coming 
from Deoghar to go to his house then it was expected that he 
should go to his house and should not proceed to Simultala 
especially when he had not assigned any reasons as to why he did 
not go to his village home and in stead proceed from Lakhisarai to 
Simultala.   This evidence of P.W.5 makes it doubtful that he could 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 30 / 38 
 
30 
be a competent witness and if he could have assigned any reason 
for going to Simultala from Lakhisarai or to Sikandara, we could 
have accepted his claim of being a competent witness.  I have 
some doubt about his claim.  I as such, have chosen to eliminate 
his evidence from my consideration. 
18. As regards the evidence of P.Ws. 2, 4 and 18, P.W.2 
had stated that he was a driver by profession and he was coming 
from Lakhisarai to Simultala by a jeep, which he was driving and 
which bore registration no. BRJ 6472.  P.W.2 was accompanied by 
P.W.4 Chandra Shekhar Prasad Singh and P.W.5 Ram Naresh 
Singh and they all alighted from the jeep at Sikandara Chowk.  
After 10-15 minutes P.W.2 heard a Hulla and went to the house of 
Jang Bahadur Singh from where the Hulla had emanated and found 
the present set of appellants going towards north carrying Neelam 
Devi, who was also raising alarms seeking help from being killed.  
P.W.2 stated that he and others resisted upon which appellant Ram 
Nandan Singh warned them to shut-up, else they too would be 
killed.  P.W.2 stated that he had found that P.W.18 had been 
caught while he was standing by the two respondents Vijay Singh 
@ Vijay Kumar Singh and Tanik Singh @ Awadh Kishore Prasad 
Singh.  P.W.2 was cross-examined at a great length and I could not 
find out a single line in that evidence on the basis of which his 
evidence should not be relied upon. 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 31 / 38 
 
31 
As regards the evidence of P.W.4 Chandra Shekhar 
Prasad Singh, he had supported P.W.2 that he was coming by a 
jeep which was driven by P.W.2 and, as may appear from 
paragraph-3 of P.W.4, they heard a Hulla, they ran towards the 
house of Jang Bahadur Singh from where the Hulla had emanated 
and saw that the accused persons brought out the deceased from 
the room and took her towards north. 
The evidence of P.W.4 was criticized by the learned 
counsel for the appellants on the ground that P.W.2 does not see 
that he had seen the accused dragging Neelam out of the house and 
then taking her away which was the evidence of P.W.4 and that 
itself indicated that P.W.4 was not a competent witness.  
Undisputedly, evidence in criminal trials generally come through 
witnesses.  The occurrence in the present case had taken place at 
10 p.m. on 30.08.1985 and P.W.4 had been examined on the 10th of 
April, 1985.  It hardly requires to be pointed out that the evidence 
being produced orally through witnesses is always bond to have 
some variation when a court compares the evidence of a witness 
with that of others.  It is not possible to get a word by word 
corroboration of facts of the case.  The human mind and memory 
both are very fragile and most often the witnesses who come to 
depose in criminal cases tell something or leave out the other while 
narrating the incident.  This may be the reason for the variance in 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 32 / 38 
 
32 
the evidence of P.Ws. 2 and 4.  Notwithstanding the variance in the 
evidence of P.Ws. 2 and 4, what appears most convincing is that 
they did not have any personal bias or reason for coming into the 
witness-box for giving evidence against the appellants.  Besides, 
the witnesses had not made such a drastic departure from the 
prosecution case as to making their evidence not fit to be accepted.  
P.Ws. 2 and 4 are consistent on one of the most important aspect of 
the case that it were the accused persons who had dragged Neelam 
from the house and had taken her away from there.  They had 
clearly identified the accused persons and had stated that they 
lifted Neelam to take her towards north which evidence supports 
the case of the prosecution which was narrated by P.W.18 in his 
first information report as also in his evidence in the Court.  
P.W.18 was a witness who could be a bit different as he was 
continuously residing in the house and was very much present 
there.  As it appears from his evidence nothing was brought into 
my notice that there could be any doubt that P.W.18 was not 
residing in the house and was not present in the night of occurrence 
there.  He has given the description of the incident from its very 
beginning to the hectic search for Neelam and ultimately finding 
her dead body lying in the paddy field at a distance of somewhere 
around 400 yards from the place of occurrence.  As such, the 
variance which was pointed out by the learned counsel for the 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 33 / 38 
 
33 
appellants in the evidence of P.Ws. 2 and 4 may not be as 
damaging as to discard their evidence. 
19. Neelam was certainly residing in the house in 
question as appears established from various evidences as also 
from that of P.W.23 Kiran Kumari her own sister and the evidence 
of the Investigating Officer that some make-up materials were also 
found in the room which further probabilized the story as there was 
no evidence that any other lady than Neelam who could have the 
requirement of make-up materials was present in the house.  
Chando Devi, who was the sister of Ram Chhabila Singh, was 
residing in the section of the house which was in his occupation 
and she was probably a widow who could not have the need of 
putting up make-up over her face.  It appears that it was the only 
lady, deceased Neelam, who was in occupation of the house and 
from the evidence of P.Ws. 2, 4, 5 and 18 we are very much 
convinced that he was taken away by the accused persons from 
that house by being dragged with her belongings, like, a couple of 
Sarees or petticoats or blouses.  The evidence indicates that as soon 
as Neelam was dragged out of her house, she was lifted and taken 
away.  Thus, she was in custody of the accused persons.  When her 
dead body was found in the next morning, it was mutilated and 
was naked with a wound on her neck as a result of slitting the 
same, as appears from the evidence of P.W.13 Dr. Satya Narain 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 34 / 38 
 
34 
Singh, who had found an incised wound in front of the neck at the 
level of the thyroid cartilage extending from left to right cutting the 
external mastoid muscles of both the sides and had cut all veins 
and vessels of the neck on both sides and the injury was deep to 
cervical vertebra.  P.W.13 had found the trachea and the esophagus 
also cut through and through.  It was an ante-mortem injury which 
was cause by some sharp cutting weapon within 24 hours of the 
holding of the post-mortem examination.  The accused persons 
have not given any explanation even in their statement under 
Section 313 Cr.P.C. as to how Neelam happened to have that fatal 
injury which could be sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to 
cause death.  Thus, the conviction of the appellants for charges 
could not be said to be bad on facts of the case. 
20. As regards the participation of the two respondents of 
the Governmental Appeal, the evidence of P.Ws. 2, 4 and 18 
clearly indicate that they had come with the appellants and some 
unknown others and no sooner they had come they pulled down 
P.W.18 from the rickshaw and took him into the corner of the 
premises near the well.  P.W.5 had given evidence exonerating the 
two respondents but I have already eliminated the evidence of 
P.W.5 from my consideration.  As regards the evidence of P.Ws. 2, 
4 and 18, there is a consistency in their evidence as regards the 
participation of the two appellants.  The learned trial Judge 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 35 / 38 
 
35 
acquitted the two appellants holding that there was lack of 
evidence and further holding that respondent Tanik Singh @ 
Awadh Kishore Prasad Singh had not even been named in the First 
Information Report.  This appears a finding, which is not borne out 
from the record of the case.  Tanik Singh @ Awadh Kishore 
Prasad Singh was duly named in the First Information Report.  It is 
true that the First Information Report did not contain any specific 
allegation against him, but the witnesses stated that respondent 
Vijay Singh @ Vijay Kumar Sharma and Tanik Singh @ Awadh 
Kishore Prasad Singh both caught P.W.18 and took him into the 
corner of the premises near a well and kept him confined till the 
accused persons had achieved their goal of capturing Neelam from 
the house and of lifting her to take her away.  The evidence 
available on record does indicate that the findings recorded by the 
learned trial Judge as regards the acquittal of the two respondents 
was definitely not borne out from the evidence of witnesses and 
the First Information Report. 
21. It was submitted that they had not committed the 
offences under Sections 364 and 302 of the Indian Penal Code.  In 
this connection I want to point out that the charges had been 
framed under Sections 364/34 and 302/34 of the Indian Penal 
Code.  Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code does not define any 
substantive sentence rather it lays down a rule of evidence that if 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 36 / 38 
 
36 
from material evidence, it is shown that the accused persons had 
acted in furtherance of their common intention, then even if the 
main act had been committed by any of them all of them was 
equally liable for the offence as if the same had been committed by 
him.  In order to bringing the case of an accused into the purview 
of Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, the Court has to find out as 
to whether there was any pre-meeting of mind or in other words 
had there been any consultations between the accused persons 
which could fall in the class of conspiracy hatched up by them to 
commit some unlawful act or an act which may not be unlawful if 
the means of committing it was unlawful.  There could not be 
direct evidence in such matters and in most of the cases, the Court 
has to depend upon the facts and circumstances of the case so as to 
find out as to whether there had been pre-concert between the 
accused persons before they had embarked upon achieving their 
goal.  Here in the present case, I have already noted, that there was 
motive for the accused persons to commit the offence as Neelam 
had not only waged a war against them, but was holding on to the 
possession of the premises so as not to allow any of the appellants 
to enter into it by virtue of the order granting letters of 
administration in their favour.  The accused persons must have 
been deeply frustrated after this Court had passed orders 
restraining either the delivery of possession or the withdrawal of 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 37 / 38 
 
37 
any part of money deposited in bank or anywhere and further 
restraining the alienation of any part of the properties which were 
covered by the letters of administration.  These all circumstances 
had led to them, as appears from the evidence, to have a pre-
concert and then to come on to the place of occurrence together to 
commit different acts.  Respondents Vijay Singh @ Vijay Kumar 
Sharma and Tanik Singh @ Awadh Kishore Prasad Singh have 
been shown from the evidence, to have put the informant under 
wrongful confinement when they had taken him into the corner of 
the house near a well.  The purpose of this act of the two 
respondents was only to eliminate any chances of resistance 
coming into the further acts of the other accused persons of 
capturing Neelam from inside the house and taking her away.  The 
other accused persons (i.e., the appellants) entered inside the house 
and dragged Neelam out and lifted her to take her away and 
subsequently her dead body was found in a paddy field.  Thus, the 
sharing of the common intention by contributing into the 
commission of the offence in their own way by the two 
respondents of the Governmental Appeal is clearly established.  As 
such, I set aside the judgment of acquittal in respect of respondents 
Vijay Singh @ Vijay Kumar Sharma and Tanik Singh @ Awadh 
Kishore Prasad Singh by allowing the Government Appeal.  I hold 
the two guilty of committing offences under Sections 364/34 and 
Patna High Court G. APP. (DB) No.16 of 1992 dt.26-03-2015 
 
 38 / 38 
 
38 
302/34 of the Indian Penal Code and direct each of them to suffer 
rigorous imprisonment on each of the two counts each for life.  In 
the result, the Government Appeal is allowed.  The connected two 
criminal appeals appear of no merit and they are dismissed.  The 
appellants are on bail.  Let them surrender along with the two 
respondents of the Government Appeal before the Court below to 
serve out their sentences which are directed to run concurrently. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sanjay/N.A.F.R. 
(Dharnidhar Jha, J.) 
 
Amaresh Kumar Lal, J.:- I agree. 
 
(Amaresh Kumar Lal, J.) 
 
U  T  
 
