Source: AWS Open Data - indian-high-court-judgments/data/pdf/year=1958/court=32_4/bench=highcourtofkerala/KLHC010000101954_1_1958-11-14.pdf
Ref: data/pdf/year=1958/court=32_4/bench=highcourtofkerala/KLHC010000101954_1_1958-11-14.pdf

i1
ll
l
•
I
I
(Kunara.Pillai,J and Joseph,J)..;;_ _
No • . 4 of 1954.
-- ---------------
J u d g me n t.
-------·-------
(Delivered ~y Joseph,J.)
the ls t plaiH ti_f_f -and one Joseph a nd two daughters,
the prelisinary decreefromThis appeal arises j
a suit for rar.ti'tion of the estate o.f one .Anthony !"lho '
8
on 5-1-1_112 !,._. · By his fir-st m2rriage he had two sons. 1
3
9
in
died
iunjelechi whc pre-deceased him and the 9 th defendant.
After the deat-~- of his first wife he married the 1st
defend.ant and :)efenr::ants .2 and 3 are the sons and Defen­
dants 4 to 7 the daughters by- the second marriage. The
8th defendant is the son of Kunj elechi deceased and_ the -,
10th defend@~nt :..s the 1st plaintiff's · wife. \These partie,
·,
· were implead.ed e.s they were lege.tees under the Will of \
Anthony. Acco:rc.ing to the last Will and testament of the./
Ideceased the assets ~ere to be divided among the 1st
defendant nd his four sons after payment of certain
lega· cies and c.e"~,ts specified in the Hill. The immoveable;
properties · to be divided a.re items 1 to 53 in schedule ....
B schedule cor::::-rises rno,;,eable properties left by the
deceased 2-nd ~ schedule, the a mounts due to the estote.
'I'he plaintiff claimed to shores on the allegation, that
his brother ,Icseph h ad assigned his slre to him. Accord-
ing to the plai.tiff the lst defendant us managing all
the properties of the deceased e,1en during his life time
and at the tiL:e of his death, she L2. 0 11i tl1 her a surn of"
Rs.14000 as accumulated income of the prcrerties. This
was also inclvded among the assets tc be partitioned.
The plaintiff also sought for settlement of accounts of
the income which had accrued after Anthony's death and
which was in the possession of the 1st defendant as exe­
cutrix under the \fill, Ext.III. Besides h is share, the
plaintiffalso claimed a. sum of Rs.8034-10-5 as amount due
to hire from deceased ..4..nthony. Defendants 1, s, Sand

.
I
•
.l
10 filed written statements. I n view of the limi
borate­
3
ly the contentions of all the contesting defendan!s. All
the defendants except the ·1st defendant have ac quiesced
in the decree passed by the trial court. The main con­
tent;ions of the lst defendant were that she had no
management till the death of her husband, th2.t the
income of the properties was no t kept by her and that she
had discharged several debts binding o n the estate. Io
of such debts were amounts due to the 3rd defendant's
wife Mariama and the 2nd defendant's wife Thresiama,
being the income from their properties which Anthony ha6·
taken. She claimed to have discharged these and several
~cope of the appeal it is unnecessary to
other debts. She claimed credit for these payments.
,
The c ourt below upheld the lst defendant's case that she
had no marwger.-;.ent of the properties till the time of
ntiony's death an d that she was not liable to account
for the profits till that date. The two pa.yments alleged,
to have been made by her to her daughters-in-law w ere
found against.
There were c ertain n egotiations for partition
before the institution of the suit and some _ mediators
attempted a cH 0.'ision. They had divided the imo veable
properties into several schedules and by consent of par­
ties,· _the properties in schedules A and B ere taken by
the plaintiff soon after the institution of the suit.
£ng
So far as the imoveble properties are c oncerned the
parties agreed to abide by the division by the mediators
and an order ,-ms passed by the court below on 6-12-1121,
ratifying the s aid arrangement.
The trial court passed a preliminary decree declar­
ing that items 1 to 53 in schedule • ~ of the plaint were
the immoveable properties available for partition. In
respect of moveables, the plaint claim was disallowed in
respect of certain items specified in the decree. As

:
•-3- • '
collected by the 1st defendant as execu;lx had
included among the partj_ble assets, ti:e Jria1
court specified certain payD1er.i.tS made by the lst defendant
as binding on the estate and she was made accountable for
the balance. Te points.raised b y the appellant mainly
relate to two debts alleged to have been paid by her
which were disallowed by the decree. The details regard­
ing these may be stated when considering the s ame.
The first point raised on behalf of the appellant
is that she is e ntitled to credit for the sums paid to
--.
•
!
the amount
•
•
also to be
kiariamama and Thresiamma. These are described as items
l4 and l6 respectively in schedule. C of her 'i:rritten
statement. Of ~hese item 14 is a sum of Rs.450 due to
-. )
Mariamua as incc:::::.e of her properties and a sum of Rs.318­
12-0 as interest thereon. as stated earlier Mariamma is
the wife of the 3rd defendant. She was a rich heiress
and she got one-half of the properties of her father who
had only two daughters. Ext.119 is the deed of partition
between Na.riamma and her sister whereunder she got cocoa... -
nut gardens and paddy fields a nd the evidence is that
the annual incc:we of these properties amounted to about
75000cocoanuts and 400 paras of paddy. Ext.XVI is a n
account igygs3ag . of the incomn e of these properties.
After the death of Anthony the 1st defendant executed a
promissory no te Ext.XVII in favour of Nariamma on 25-1-
1119 for a -sum of Rs .450C. It is this amount which is
stated to have been repaid by the 1st defendant with the
income she received as executrix. The plaint1f's case
on this point is that the 1st defendant was all along max
managing these properties, that Anthony had nothing to do
with it and that the estate was not answerable for the
claim. The trial court upheld the plaintiff's case and
disallowec5 the 1st defendant's claim. There was a similar
claim regarding the income of the properties of hresiam ,)
wife of the 2nd defendant. She was married in Makarom
1114 and the dowry paid was a s um of Rs.5000. Ext. XVIII

\
-4-
is the account relating to this.
,•
•Ets.P and D arflt sale
I
deeds for properties purchased with the dowry amount.
Of these Ext.P is a sale deed dated 2 1-5-1115 for Rs.17CC
!
and Ext.D dated 31-9-1116 for Rs.3790-Anas 3. According'
to Ext.XVIII, the accrued income from these properties
on 27-1-1119 as Rs.2050-7-3. On 1-1-1120 the 1st
defendant executed a promissory note Et.XI in favour
of Ihersiamma for Rs.2200 and this debt is a lleged to
hage been paid by her with the income of the e state on
30-12-1120. The contention of the nlaintiff regarding
this item is sailar to the previous one. The main
question whic~ therefore arises for decision is whether
the income of te properties of Mariamma and The siamma
was collected a:_-_d spent by Anthcny or the 1 st defendant.
If Anthony tock eg the income, the estate is answerable
for the same. In considering this question reference has
to be made to t::.:.e plaintiff's ca.se that during the latter
part of his life Anthony was unable to manage h is proper-
ties and that the 1st defendant was managing all his
properties. This case was found against by the trial
court. In the .n.2ture of the evidence in the case it is
difficult to ur:old the c onclusion reached by the lower
regarding pent of the debts to Mariamma and Thresianecourt,/ The ls defendant filed several documents to
substantiate her case that Anthony was managing the proper
ties of his daughters-in-law. Exts.98 to 111 are the
relevant documer-'-ts. The learned Subordinate Judge does
not appear to have paid proper attention to these docu­
ments. Ext.98 is an envelope on which Anthony has made a
note in his own hand-writing that the contents were
Mariamma's notes and receipts. Ext.98 is a similar
envelope on which Anthonv has made a note that the con-to
tents ccnsistec: of \fariamma' s notices etc. Ext.100 is
a notice received by Mariarmma from V.T.K. state in
respect of a property which belonged to the said estate
and which had been originally demised in favour of a
>
stranger. Anthony has made a note on it that the notice

- 5­ 3
relates to a property obtained by t::ariamma in partition,
that rene-wal fee in respect of the same h ad been paid.
in 1113 a11d that subseg_uent renewal had not become due.
This entry appears to be the draft of the reply to the
notice. As the notice was one dated 25-11-1117 Anthony
must have written this on a later date, which shows that
even one year before his death he was looking after
:Mariarnma's prcperties. Ext.101 is a s chedule of
Mariamma's properties in which she had mortgage rights.
Ext.102 is a letter to the lst defendant from her
\
brother rele.ti ,,g to a property which belonged to Mariarnu,
1
,
Anthony has zaade a no te at the bottom on 22-6-l117 to
the e ffect tha a reply was sent to bis brother-in-law
on the 22nd. Ext6.103 is draft of the reply referred to
in Ext.102 an'.i this also contains a marginal note in
Anthony's hand.-writing. Ext.103A is draft of a letter
sent by Anthony to his brother-in-law regarding the
same property. Ext.104 is a receipt taken from one
Varkey on payent of a sum of money due to him from
Mariamma under the partition deed in her family. Anthony
has made a n ote on the back of it in his own handwriting
explaining the nature of the document. Ext.105 is a
letter from a stranger to Anthony regarding certain
amount due from him to Mariamma and esking for time for
repayment. TI::.is is a debt referred to as i tern 20 in
schedule 3 of Ext.ll the partition deed in llariamma IsI -
family. Tis shows that deceased Anthony had sent a
registered notice in Makarom 1117 for collection of
the a rount due to Mariamma. Ets.17 and 1CG are letter
from Anthony to the Vicar of a Church C.emanding r/ayment
of a debt to ariamma. 'The debt itself _is item 27 in
schedule cf Kt.ll9. We hae referred only to those
documents which admittedly contain Anthony's handwriting.
These show that Anthony was taking an active part in tle
management of the properties of 1-1ariar;1.ma. As stated
earlier most of these are of the ye2,rs 1116 and 1117.

,-.
-o-
The explanatio:-: offered by the plaintiff is that these
being correspor..dence with strangers, Anthony may h ave
A
attended to the same instead of leaving it to his wife.
These however do not consist of corresrondence a lone.
Some of these such as xts. and are notes made by
Anthony in his own hand-writing on the ~Jc.ck of en,;elopes'
stating that the contents related to Eariamma1s proper-
ties. Certai circumstance s were also relied on by the
plaintiff to sl:ow that if the incon:e lrnc been collected
and used by nCony he would have given some document to
his daughters-i:-la especially as he e xecuted p romissory
notes in favour of all creditors including close relat­
ives. 5ts.7I, XV), XI and II are such promissory
notes. The fact that these ilems did not find a place
in a book Ext.I.III wherein he h ad noted his debts was
also relied on. Anthony being dead it is no t possible
· to ascertc:in ;,..ir-:- he did no t execute any document to his
daughters-in-la or enter these in Ext.XIII. A possible
exaplanticn is that these amounts were entered in accounts
writ.ten by one E.K.Joseph who was looking after Anthony's
properties and writing the accounts relating to the
same. Again, since Anthony was· managing his own proper­
ties till the end it is difficult to hold that he le;ft
it to his wife to manage the properties of his daughters­
in-law. It has a lso to be stated that this is a point on
which the plaintiff could not give reliable evidence as
T
he was not staying with Anthony or the 1st defendant
during this period. Gn the other hand there is oral
- .· -.f
evidence supJ)Orting the 1st defendant's case. D..6 is
Mr.T.A. Verghese, a son-in-law of Anthony and the 1st
defendant. He is an I.c.s. Officer still in service and
there is evidence in the case to show that his advice
was sought by ai:( the parties in several matters. He
has deposed that the properties of Mriamma and Thresiamma
-/ went iuto the co mmon pool and that Anthony was in

financial difficulties even though h e owned several
immoveable properties. He further stated that his infor-·
/
mation that the income was not treated separately from
the personal income of Anthony was obtained fror:1 the 1st·
plaintiff and the lst defendant. le believe h is testimcn
t
in full. Defendants 2 and 3 have a lso deposed in support
•
of the case of their mother the 1st defendant. Their
evidence is t.zt their father was managing these proper­
ties and taking the income. The 2nd defendant deposed
that Anthony hi.:'.:lself bad told him so. The 3rd d efendant
stated that his father was collecting the income of
Marianm1a1 s pro:;:erties and that the only occasion on which
he received money out of such income was in lll7 when
he required h.s.350 to go to Bezwada. Ee added that there
was no need to take a docrunen t from his father singe
proper acccunts were being kept. The promissory note
was taken fror is mother after his father's death as he
was in the arr.:y and as he thought that nobody would be
answerable for the a mount if anything happened to his
mother also. e have already stated that the 1st plain­
tiff was not i a position to have any direct knowledge
about this matter. Even though Defendants 2 and 3 are
parties to the suit we are not prepared to say that they
should be disbelieved on that ground. The documentary
evir::'ence refe.rred to earlier fully supports their version.
Coming ta the ebt due to Thresiam1a; reference may be
made to Exts.110 and 111, letters sent by .:1.nthony to
Thresiamma's father regarding disposition of her dowry
amount. Ia Ext.llO dated 13-5-1ll4 he s uggested that
the a mount should be deposited in her father's Bank as
the rate of interest was higher thm.:. was available in the
Balks at Ernaiulam. I Ext.lll dated 20-4-lll5 he asked
for return of 16G Rupees for purchasing a property for
'Thre siamma and her husband. {ll the reasons which
weighed with us for holding that .nthony was looking
\.
after Mariamnia's properties and taking the income thereof,

-8-
apply to Thresiamma's properties also. We therefore h old
that the income of these properties · was t2ken and utilised.
_ _,
by Anthony and that the estate is answerable for the same~
The 1st defendant :ts therefore entitled to credit for
the amounts paid by her to Mariamua and Thresiamma.
The next point relates to the appellant's claim for
credit of Rs.GCCO in addition to what has been decreed.
This clnim aris-ss out of a chitty transaction. ie do not
consider that th.is point merits elaborate discussion a s
this was not raised in the written statement. The 1st
defendant appended v arious schedules to her written
statement but she omitted to include this in any of these.
If her case reg2.rding this is true, she is e ntitled to
deduct Rs.600C from the amount due to the 1st plaintiff.
In that case there is n o explanation for not referring to
this as she had q uestioned a small portion of the amount
claimed by the 1st plaintiff f rom the estate. During the
course of the argument we pointed out this omission in
the pleadings srd Shri Venkiteswara Iyer learned counselI
for the aprells.nt then filed an application for amendment '
of the written statement. We do not think there is any
justification for allowing the application. According to
t
'•
a s ettlement cf the dispute prepared schedules regarding i
claims and cou:..-:.ter-claims. It is admitted that this
claim w as n ot :raised b efore them. The snit was hotly
contested in te court below and it is unlikely that the
.. 1st defendant ho was careful enough to mention even
trivial cl:=iims could have overlooked this subst,mtial
sum of Rs.:iOCC. ·r11e ev idence as it stands also does not
support the neu plea. .According to the 1st defendant her
husband had ar, unprized ticket in a kuri conducted by a
church. The plaintiff's wife a lso had a ticket,which
she prized and the prize money was received by Anthony wh<
in turn assigned his unprized ticket to the plaintiff
the lst defensnt the mediators who attempted to effect

#
--9­
under Ext.89. According to the lst defendant the
subscriptions for both these tickets were paid b y Anthony
till the termination of the kuri. The lst defendant has
not produced receipts to substantiate that subscriptions
were thus paid 'Jy Anthony in respect of both the tickets.
Ext.J is a letter given by Anthony to the plaintiff
regarding the uri transaction. This a lso does not
support this c laim. If Anthony really had to get Rs.6OGG
under this h eac he is n ot likely to have omitted to refer
to it in Ext.J. Further discussion is Ulmece ss:c,.ry as the
application for amendment is refused. Tis point is
therefore decided against the appellant.
The third point raised is that the plaintiff who
took the properties in schedules A and was liable to
pay Rs.lOCO to the 1st defendant and a similar sum to the
2nd defendant ±r equalisation of shares and that he
should have been, made liable for interest thereon from
the be ginning cf 1122 as h e took possession of all the
properties schedules a nd B as per the order dated
6-12-1121. The 1st defendant's case is that the 1st
plaintiff should be made liable for interest on Rs.2000
from the begi::__:_ :..ing of 1122 -or at any rate from the date
of the preliui=.ary decree. This is a point which may
be left for decision to the co urt below at the time of
passing the fial decree. The appellant is allowed to
raise this in the court below and the s ame will be
considered when. passing the final decree. We do not
therefore propose to decide this claim at this stage.
The last roint raised relates to the declaration
in the decree-~ in respect of a sum of Rs.4875 being
proceeds of the s ale of a property under Ext.C and a sum
of Rs.100 being the value of a school building. These
are included 2.mong the partible assets. The point
raised is that the liability of the ls defendant in
respect of these amounts does arise until all accounts

-10-
are settled and that it is incorrect to treat these
as partible assets. All that the lower court means is
that these a re i tems t o be taken into a ccount when
passing the final decree. The question of 1iabi4-ity of
the lst defendant arises only in case she is finallyJ
held accountable for any amount.
The a t:idi t=--.onal plaintiffs have filed a meu.orandum of
cross-objecticns. The main ground r elates to the dis­
. allowance of tl"::.e claim in respect of the sun of Rs .14000
alleged to hae been in the lst defendant's possession
at the t ine c Anthony's death as accumulated income o f
the properties. The l ower court has g iven valid_grounds
for disallowing this claim. Anthony had to borrow even
small amounts.ring his last sg years and it is unlike- i
ly that he wcud have done so if the sum of Rs.loG
was available. Since Anthony was in management t ill his
death the c lai is not sustainable even if any portion
pf the income as available witch the lst defendant at
the time of his death since i t ·was open for Anthony to
give t he same ts the lst defendant. Another point •
relates to the v alue o f the school building dismantled
by the 1st defendant. The lower court has awarded only
a sum of Rs.l as against Rs.IGO claimed under this
head. There ~ s no satisfactory evidence in the case
to support the plaintiff's claim. We do not think any
modification is necessary under this head. The last
point i n the neuorandv.m of objections relates to the
idirection regarding costs. The c ourt below directed the
plaintiff and the lst defendant to bear their respective
costs. We consider that the court below has exercised
proper discretion in this matter and that i nterference
is not called for. The memorandum of cross-objections
must therefore be dismissed.
In the result the appeal is allowed to this extent
viz., that in addition to t he amounts given credit to by

-11­
the court below, the lst defendant i s given credit for
the sum of Rs.4678 paid to Mariamma on 30-3-1120 and the
• a • 7 0sum of Rs.2266 paid to Th4rsiamma on 3- -112%. These
amounts will also be taken into account at the time of
passing the final decree. The appeal is dismissed in
other r espects. Proportionate costs are allowed in the
appeal. The memorandum of cross-objections is dismissed
with costs.
+ November 1958.
- =-,
see

